
2.: The Quarterly Review, No. lviii.—Faux’s Memorable Days in America.
OUR brief notice of the recent travels through the Anglo-American United States had just been printed off, when the Quarterly Review for December made its appearance; and as it contains a long article on “Faux’s Memorable Days,” a fitter opportunity could scarcely have presented itself for estimating the candour, knowledge, and integrity of that Review,—and for developing the process by which it fabricates a representation calculated to flatter the passions and prejudices of those who entertain an instinctive hatred of responsible and economical government.
The writer seems absolutely delirious with joy at finding in Mr. Faux’s journal, what any intelligent and reflecting person might easily have anticipated, and what we have distinctly admitted in our introductory remarks on emigration; viz. that every one who emigrates to or resides in a newly settled and thinly peopled country must, though assured of an adequate subsistence, submit to great physical inconvenience and privation,—that his security for person or property will not be of so high an order as in some older established communities, the slender means of the new society not admitting of an efficient judicature and police, and the absence of neighbourhood rendering character of comparatively little importance,—and that without assiduous industry he can never attain a situation of tolerable comfort.
In order that persons disposed to emigrate might know precisely what amount of inconvenience and peril they would have to encounter, we have extracted from Mr. Faux the most aggravated and best authenticated instances of both kinds of annoyance, rendering them occasionally more prominent by italic type; and, allowing for all these detractions from the advantage of ceasing to feel anxiety on the score of subsistence, or the actual pangs of hunger, we have indicated the class of persons who alone can better their situation by emigration to such a country.
After the general admissions contained in our outset, it would have been superfluous to have loaded our pages with multiplied instances in detail; but had we been disposed to do this, so many of those mentioned by Faux rest upon mere hearsay or the assertions of loose talkers, that the number of authentic facts would not have been considerably increased.
Now how has the writer in the Quarterly Review constructed Edition: current; Page: [251] his article? Thirty-two pages,—the whole of this lengthy performance,—has he nearly filled with extracts from Faux, containing the details of individual instances of ferocity, violence, knavery, boasting and vulgarity, disappointment, failure, despondency, bad soils, bad climates, bad food, discomfort, dirt, and barbarism,—all on the debtor side of the account, without hinting at the existence of a single item on the creditor side. In Mr. Faux’s journal the good and evil are pretty equally blended; descriptions of kindly soils, of successful and satisfied industry, of generosity, liberal feeling, and integrity, and of the good effects of an economical form of government, are neither unfrequent nor ill attested; indications are given of the cause of failure in many cases of disappointment: but of all this, not one word from the writer in this Review,—it would not have suited his purpose; which, from his sneers at the “Land of Freedom,” and irrepressible expressions of hatred towards republican government, we may fairly assume to be, an endeavour to persuade the reader that the evils, physical and moral, inseparable from every infant state of society, are altogether the result of American institutions, or rather of the absence of a certain institution; for in the want of an established church, the Quarterly reviewer discovers the cause of every offence committed in the United States. (p. 369.) Without religion, says he, there can be no morals; without an established church there can be no religion!—at least, none that will suit this gentleman. The only religious people are those who take upon trust all that their parish priest delivers,—who, without bestowing a single thought on religion or the evidence adduced in support of it, say their prayers, go to church, nod through half the service, and pay tithes without a murmur. Those who investigate a little,—who differ from what said parish priest chooses to lay down,—who doubt the Athanasian creed, or any of the thirty-nine articles,—who are depressed with the fear of eternal flames, or elevated with the hope of eternal pleasure,—these are all, according to the charitable and expanded views of the Quarterly Review, infidels or fanatics! (p. 369.) Whatever may be the effects of religion in general as a sanction for morals, this writer himself affords a striking instance, that “that pure and reformed branch of it,” the established church, is not competent to compel the observance of truth among its acquiescent votaries. He is no doubt an eminently pious and churchgoing man, and he is sufficiently instructed to be aware that there are many modes of making a mendacious statement besides the simple process of mendacious invention. Suppressio veri est expressio falsi. There is the false by omission, as well as the false by substitution; and of all modes of falsehood, the false Edition: current; Page: [252] by omission is the most deceptious, because it contains to a certain extent the elements of truth.
Now a more base and mischievous falsehood than that conveyed by the totality of the article now under consideration, it is impossible to conceive; base, because in the face of repeatedly conflicting statements contained in the very book referred to, the reader of the article is induced to believe that the book contains none but unfavourable representations, and he is told (p. 368.), that the reviewer has given “but the smallest portion of the unfavourable account of the American population;”—mischievous, because by every species of insolence and contempt, endeavours are made to exasperate against each other two nations who have the strongest interest in preserving the relations of friendship.
So much for the candour and integrity of our Tory scribe! Now for his knowledge, and the value of the materials with which he has filled his thirty-two pages.
Who—unless it be one whose intellect has been blinded by existing abuses—is ignorant of the leading principles which assign the various degrees of trustworthiness to the various species of evidence; of the difference between primary and secondary evidence, between direct testimony and hearsay? What child does not know that in passing from mouth to mouth every story either gains or loses so much, that after a certain number of transmissions it is often difficult to recognize the original narrative? Now at least one half of the facts selected with such care by the Quarterly Review from Faux’s journal, rest, not upon Faux’s own observation and direct testimony, but upon no better evidence than mere hearsay, and that of the weakest and most unsatisfactory kind,—the babble of loose talkers, tavern companions, and disappointed projectors. Great reliance is placed by the Review on general assertions hazarded at random, collected from few or inconclusive particulars, and mixed up with the foolish opinions of foolish individuals; and yet, after having been at the pains to devote four pages to the rendering contemptible and ridiculous an individual whose opinions Faux details at the greatest length, the writer concludes his article by ascribing to the opinions of others, so repeated by Faux, greater credit than to the statements and opinions of Faux himself, whose integrity and understanding are highly vaunted at the beginning of the critique.
The Quarterly reviewer extracts the story of “a poor fellow who was found lying in the street” (at Charlston) “in a hot broiling sun 110° by the thermometer, with both legs broken and dreadfully bruised, having been robbed of all he had: he had lain there all night, equally unnoticed by the nightly watch and the open-day humanity of the citizens; and had not an old Prussian Edition: current; Page: [253] colonel offered a dollar to have him removed as a nuisance, he would have been suffered to roast and be devoured by the flies.”
We omitted to select this story for extraction, not only because we deemed it somewhat improbable, but because Faux does not say that he saw the sight himself, and the narrative is accompanied with one or two minute circumstances which cast an air of doubtfulness over the whole;—for instance, the person who ordered the sufferer to be removed, is said to have called out to two slaves, “Here! July and August!” do so and so. Considering the heat of the day, it struck us as somewhat singular, that the slaves should be so appositely named July and August, in such happy succession. The same circumstance probably struck the candid reviewer as a ground for distrust, for he cautiously omits it in his extract.
The following story is also extracted in the same spirit:—

‘I saw an execution lately defeated by that boasted spirit which they call liberty or independence. The property under execution was put up to sale, when the eldest son appeared with a huge herculean club, and said, “Gentlemen, you may bid for and buy these things, which were my father’s, but by G—no man living shall come on to this ground with horse and cart to fetch them away. The land is mine, and if the buyer takes any thing away, it shall be on his back.’ ”

We omitted to select this story as one of the examples to show the degree of insecurity the emigrant might have to encounter, not because we deemed it improbable,—for in our introductory remarks we had admitted and accounted for the weakness of the judicial arm in remote and thinly inhabited districts,—but because the story does not rest on the authority of Faux, but was related to him by one Squire Liddiard; of whom we know nothing, except that by his own account he was precisely the sort of person who ought not to have emigrated to the Western States,—a London merchant, with a counting-house near the Exchange and a citizen’s box at Blackheath.
Such are the stories, and so evidenced, on which the reviewer grounds his implied proposition, that the American people are so debased, and their institutions so pernicious, as to render existence among them absolutely intolerable, and our “excellent constitution in church and state” the only thing which can secure the happiness of man. These stories bear the date of 1819.
Three years have not elapsed since an aged pauper, in the middle of this metropolis of London, was thrust from parish to parish, from officer to officer, each contesting the liability to administer Edition: current; Page: [254] relief, till the last on whose hands he was thrown left him famishing with cold and hunger in the open streets. The wretched sufferer, unable to crawl further, laid himself down at night in a public thoroughfare near Drury Lane, where thousands passed by him regardless of his dying groans. The next morning he was found a stiffened corpse, and a coroner’s jury brought in a verdict of “Died by Starvation!”
Three months have not elapsed since two individuals, one of them with the rank and education of a gentleman, tempted by the prospect of gaining a few pounds, made beforehand every preparation for the murder and interment of one of their familiar companions; enticed him into the vehicle which contained the sack for the concealment of his corpse; dispatched him within a few miles of this same metropolis, by beating his skull to pieces; and having deposited him in a pond close by the house at which the deceased and themselves were to have met for a convivial entertainment, sat down to supper as if nothing extraordinary had happened!
Three weeks have barely elapsed since a drama founded on this horrible assassination, was performed at a public theatre in this same metropolis; in which drama was produced on the stage, before a crowded and applauding audience, the identical vehicle and horse which had conveyed the miserable victim on his journey to eternity!
Three days have barely elapsed (Jan. 3. 1824) since, in the same county which was the scene of the preceding outrage, a special constable, James Grainge, has actually been murdered in an attempt to enforce legal process; the party who resisted being a man of education, and assisted by a beautiful woman of twenty-six!*
The story of the dying pauper is at least as afflicting to humanity, and a little better authenticated than the jocose appeal to July and August at Charlston;—and the story of James Grainge carries into effect what Squire Liddiard’s story only threatens.
Now suppose A. B., an American traveller through England, had stated, among other things, the four preceding facts; suppose he had also stated the recent murders of Mr. Mumford, of Mrs. Donatty, of Mr. Smith at Greenwich, of the Marrs, of the Bonars, and as many others as he could pick up in coffee-houses and stage-coaches; suppose he were to state the number of juvenile offenders every year committed to prison within the precincts of London, the number of houses annually set on fire Edition: current; Page: [255] about the time of the half-yearly payments of rent, the number of paupers and amount of poor-rates, the number of bankrupts, the number of insolvents, and the amount of assets available to their creditors; suppose he had also stated such appearances as he might have observed of occasional prosperity, comfort, and cleanliness,—appearances of fertile soil, unbounded capital, and transcendent industry and skill;—
What would the Quarterly reviewer have said if a North American democratic reviewer, reviewing A. B.’s travels, should make a detailed extract of all the disparaging circumstances, omit all the favourable ones, and then exclaim, or leave the reader to imply, “These are the blessed effects of monarchical and aristocratic institutions! This is the land where King, Lords, and Commons are so happily balanced, that each plays into the hand of the other! This is the land of legitimate sway, ‘attempered liberty,’ and borough influence! This is the land of the established church! Federalists and sentimentalists, before you cross the ocean to gaze at empty pomp and factitious dignity, before you surrender your understandings to admire the antiquities of your half-civilized ancestors, listen to A. B. Mark well the facts we have laid before you, and then choose your dwelling, if you dare, among a people so heartless as to leave a fellow-creature to perish in a crowded street,—so cruel, as to view with approbation, at a play-house, objects which would most forcibly bring to their imagination all the details of an aggravated murder;—settle, if you dare, in a land where neither person nor property are secure,—where assassinations are the topic of the day, and the arm of the law is resisted by weapons of death!”
Would the Quarterly reviewer admit, that such a representation as this contained one spark of candour, integrity, or truth? Would he admit, that a reviewer who should so exclude every favourable representation in regard to England,—who should ascribe to institutions, incidents inseparable from the condition of man in the present state of society,—would he admit, that such a reviewer possessed one spark of feeling, honour, or principle? And yet this is precisely the process which, with a fiendlike exultation, this writer has pursued with regard to America.
But before we have done we shall bring home to him, yet more clearly, blind malignity against a people whose only offence, beyond the failings to which it is subject in common with his own countrymen, is the offence of having an economical and responsible government.
It is notorious, that a great proportion of those who leave this country, either for Chili or the United States, are of the lowest and most ignorant class; it is equally notorious, that they commonly Edition: current; Page: [256] labour under the delusion of expecting that, when they arrive in the promised land, they shall be exempt from the common lot of humanity, the necessity of labouring for subsistence; and that they frequently waste in idleness and drinking the hours and money with which they might shortly better their condition.
No man knows this better than the writer in the Review himself: he admits it expressly in page 366.; and yet he has extracted from Faux every expression of discontent from every disappointed emigrant, without in the least adverting to the cause of each individual’s disappointment, though, in a variety of instances, Faux has clearly traced it to the imprudence or incapacity of the sufferer.
In a laboured article “On the Condition of the Negroes in our Colonies” (p. 476. in this same number), the Quarterly attacks Mr. Wilberforce for rejecting all apology for the treatment of slaves in the West Indies; and contends that they are, in many respects, better off than the labouring classes in England. (No. LVIII. pp. 479. 485.) But no sooner does he come to the United States,—where, as we have demonstrated (ante, p. 113.), the treatment of slaves is infinitely less severe than in the West Indies,—than our reviewer altogether alters his tone: “Though many of the planters treat their slaves well, and allow them as much indulgence as is consistent with their situation, yet negroes being, in the eye of the American law, a degraded class, and denied the enjoyment of equal rights, their wellbeing is entirely dependent on the personal character of their owner; and however humane their treatment may be, we cannot agree with farmer Faux in his conclusion, that their condition in any, much less in many, respects is better than that of paupers in his native land.”
If they are a degraded class in the eye of the American law, are they not equally so, and that within the writer’s knowledge, in the Anglo-West Indian law? If their condition in the West Indies is better than that of an English pauper, what should make it otherwise in America, where, according to his own admission, “many of the planters treat their slaves well, and allow them as much indulgence as is consistent with their situation?”
Our reviewer’s hatred, however, is not confined to America or Americans; his own countrymen become the objects of attack for no other offence than that of preferring a residence on the other side of the Atlantic: and how is this attack conducted? Not content with filling four whole pages in the endeavour to render ridiculous and contemptible Mr. Thomas Law*, a man who, through a long and eventful life, has sustained the most irreproachable Edition: current; Page: [257] character, this writer, with all the charity and good faith so peculiar to a moralist of the Quarterly Review, proceeds to sneer away his reputation for integrity and principle by mendacious and unfounded insinuations,—as, that he quitted England for America because he was mortified at not being a peer. Again, “This gentleman,” says this writer, “accumulated (it is not said by what means) an immense fortune in India.” True, it is not said by what means, for the history of his Indian life would have been grossly irrelevant in a book of travels through America; but we can take upon ourselves to say by what means he did not accumulate his fortune: he did not pander to the passions and prejudices of an insolent and craving aristocracy, by detailing as many as he could find recorded of those crimes and disorders which could not but have place to a certain extent in a community of ten millions, and then, with an utter disregard of truth and principle, exhibit this catalogue to the world as a representation on which men should form their opinions as to the character and condition, and the effect of the political institutions of that same community.
But we have not quite done with this reviewer. As if it were possible for any civilized society, however well organized, to exist without contribution for common purposes, as if it were not notorious to the whole world, if not to the Quarterly Review, that the several states in America receive for local purposes a revenue analagous to our county and poor’s rate, and that this revenue is raised by taxes imposed in the legislature of each state,—the general government expenses of the whole United States being defrayed chiefly by the customs,—this writer, on extracting from Faux, that land in the Illinois belonging to Orator Hunt’s brother was uncultivated, and selling for the payment of taxes, appears absolutely dancing in a transport of joy. “Avast reading, there!” he cries. (p. 365.) “Overhaul that article again! as Old Trunnion says. Taxes, did you say? Taxes, in this last retreat of suffering humanity, and the land selling to pay them!”
Yes, Taxes! With any man in his senses, the question is, not, whether there are taxes, but what is their amount. And this is a piece of information which, with regard to America, the Quarterly Review never will dare to give: still less will it dare to contrast it with the taxation endured by Great Britain. Probably the reviewer would have suppressed his mirth and transport had he anticipated that the false insinuation it was meant to convey, would have induced us to lay at once before the eyes of mankind this fearful contrast, which we should otherwise have Edition: current; Page: [258] deferred for a season. Let him read what follows, and then call in, not Hawser Trunnion, but the Attorney-general to his assistance; for if, as Lord Ellenborough expressly laid it down, any thing is a libel which may hurt the feelings of any individual (meaning, of course, a dignified individual), nothing, we conceive, can be more libellous in the eyes of one of the ruling few than the columns of figures we shall forthwith deploy.
As we have before had occasion to state, the expenses of the general government of the United States;—of the army, navy, public offices, public officers; of congress; of the interest and liquidation of the public debt, and of all extensive undertakings affecting the States at large,—are defrayed, in time of peace, by a revenue derived almost exclusively from the customs and the sale of lands in the new territories of the Union.
So far, and for such extensive purposes, we have nothing beyond indirect taxation, and that to how small an amount we shall presently show.
Besides this, there is raised by direct taxation in each individual state a local revenue, called the state tax, analagous to our county and poor’s rate; which revenue is applied to the following, among other purposes, which comprehend, in addition to those before stated, almost all the possible expenses of local and general government.—Judicature, including the salaries of judges, expenses of courts, rewards to prosecutors, and expenses of trial: gaols: elections: public printing and stationery: schools: roads*, bridges, and fishery-encouragement: expenses of the state parliament.—The revenue for these purposes is raised in some instances by a tax on land (exceeding in no case four-pence an acre, and in many districts not exceeding one penny); in others by a capitation tax on all males above sixteen; in others by assessments on carriages, or other articles not of primary necessity; and in the older states, by the sale of lands, and by the interest arising on monies belonging to the state. (See Statistical, Political, and Historical Account of the United States, by D. B. Warden, late Consul to Paris.)
Now our county and poor’s rates, in addition to the maintenance of the poor, cover scarcely any expenses but those of gaols, bridges, and that part of the expense of judicature which is occasioned by the building and furnishing of courts, rewards to prosecutors, and some of the expenses of trial.
In addition to our county and poor’s rates, we are also saddled Edition: current; Page: [259] with tithes;—paying about the fourth of the value of all the landed property of the country for the support of an established church; a blessing with which brother Jonathan has learned to dispense.*
Edition: current; Page: [260]
But, to the point.—Direct taxes for the expenses of the general government in America we have seen there are none; tithes Edition: current; Page: [261] there are none; and the figures below will prove that the state or local taxes covering so many more objects than our county and poor’s rates, do not equal those rates by nearly three quarters their amount.
The states and counties have been taken at random, the one from Warden’s book, the other from returns made to Parliament, and are offered merely as a sample.














United States.
Population in 1810.
Revenue.

English Counties.
Population in 1811.
Population in 1821.
Average Amount of Poor & other Rates in 1813—14—15.




Dollars.



£




Massachusetts
472,040
306,333
}
Devon
396,100
447,900
283,429


South Carolina
415,115
313,026
}






Maine
228,705
209,257

Cornwall
223,900
262,600
120,568


New York
959,049
317,745
}
Middlesex
985,100
1,167,500
663,103


Virginia
974,622
414,133
1811 }






Connecticut
261,942
79,192
1811
Essex
260,900
295,300
328,031


Pennsylvania
810,091
601,344
1815
Lancaster
856,000
1,074,000
433,419


Delaware
72,674
72,163
1811
Bedford
73,600
85,400
74,782


Kentucky
406,511
105,180

Kent
385,600
434,600
407,459




It must be distinctly borne in mind that the whole of the above revenues, arising to the several States, is not made up of direct annual taxes, but that a considerable portion of each is acquired by the sale of lands and the interest arising from monies belonging to the state. So that it may fairly be affirmed that the whole amount of direct taxation falling in any shape upon any given amount of population in the United States, does not equal a fourth of the poor’s rates and county rates alone, paid by an equal amount of population in Great Britain.
Now for the comparison of the expenses of the general government.
The whole expense of the civil government, including the salaries of the President and Vice-President, wages of the members of the Senate and House of Representatives; the diplomatic and miscellaneous expenses, including pensions; all the public offices, post office, mint, light-houses, surveys of land, the government of those parts called territories, and every other expense whatever, Edition: current; Page: [262] which does not belong to the army and navy,—were estimated for the year 1822 at 1,664,297 dollars, or 353,613l.*
By the British finance accounts for the year ending the 5th of January, 1821, the sum actually paid was 6,797,399l.; this sum, like the 353,613l. in America, includes all the items which do not belong to the military or naval departments. Thus the civil government here costs very nearly twenty times the amount of the civil government in America,—in other words, it costs the nation as much to be governed for one year, as it costs the Americans to be governed for twenty years; and yet America is, beyond all comparison, better governed than Great Britain and Ireland. But we do, in fact, spend more than thirty times as much as the American United States for our civil government.








In the finance accounts before alluded to, the charge for management, that is, the expense attending the collection of the revenue, is set down at
£3,267,633


There are other sums also paid out of the gross receipts of the revenue, from which, when we have deducted drawbacks and discounts, there will remain upwards of
1,500,000


To which add, as before
6,797,399


And the annual expense will be
£11,565,032




Which is nearly thirty-three times the amount of the annual expenditure in America. But it may be objected, that in America there are also charges for management: to which we reply, certainly; and that some of them are included in the 353,613l. which the civil government costs; and that a sum greater than all the charges of management in America, is raised in several ways for the government here at home, which is given away in pensions and payments of various kinds, and never comes into the annual finance accounts. So that the money thus raised may be set off against the expense of management in America.—Another objection which may be made is, that each of the state governments defrays its own expenses. But here again the balance will be in favour of America, the county rates, and other assessments and payments for local purposes at home, being probably several times the amount of all the state governments in America; we will, however, take them at the same sum, and then the account will remain as before stated, namely,








That the charge for the civil government here amounts to
£11,565,032


In America to
353,613




Edition: current; Page: [263]
or very nearly one thirty-third the sum we are compelled to pay.
But to show still more plainly the profligacy of the system here at home, we will make a few comparisons in detail.—On the 16th of March, 1819, was “published by order of the House of Commons, a paper, No. 114., being an account of the total expense of the following offices, viz.:—Privy Council, Treasury, Secretaries of State, and Messengers in the Lord Chamberlain’s department:”—













£.
s.
d.




1.
Privy Council office—Clerks, Messengers, Coals, &c.
27,373
17
11


2.
Treasury—Clerks, Messengers, Coals, &c.
103,139
17
6


3.
Secretaries of State
122,880
5
0


4.
Messengers in the Lord Chamberlain’s office
2,000
0
0




£255,394
0
5




This is a most monstrous sum for only three of the public offices, and the porters, or, as they are called, the messengers of a fourth office; but enormous as it is, it by no means shows the actual sum these offices cost. It is not many years since a sort of exposure took place in the trade department of the treasury, when it was discovered, that clerks of 800l. a-year kept magnificent houses, regular sets of servants, and three or four carriages, spending, in fact, the revenues of noblemen from the fees they obtained; it is enough, however, for our purpose, to take the expense of these offices at the sums furnished by ministers themselves: let us then see what our brethren in America pay for having the business done for which these offices are appointed. The whole expense for every thing which in any way relates to the Treasury, the Secretary of State, and the Exchequer of the United States, including the expense of distributing 11,000 copies of the laws passed at the preceding Congress, was 48,035l., not one-fifth part of the charge for the three offices here; and if we could ascertain the expenses of the Exchequer in addition to the three offices, as well as the pensions and sinecures, it would probably come out that the whole charge was more than a dozen times the amount paid by the people of the United States.
The expenses of the Houses of Lords and Commons cannot be accurately stated; but the finance accounts give us some items. In the session of 1822 there were voted—
Edition: current; Page: [264]








For salaries to the officers of both houses
£22,800


Fittings and furniture for both houses
22,500


Expenses of both houses
19,055


Printing for both houses
64,677



£129,032




In the United States of North America each of the representatives in both houses receives eight dollars, or 36s. 6d. per diem wages, during the time they are going to, remaining at, and returning home from Congress, as was formerly the case here. Supposing the Congress to sit for three months, or that the member is occupied one hundred days on the public business; then as the number of representatives in the two houses is 237, the amount of their wages will be 189,600 dollars, or 40,290l.; and this is possibly the best laid out money which a people can expend, and which we of course do not expend on those who, instead of being the servants of the people, are their masters, and ought not, of course, to receive wages. On this point, then, there is nothing to which we can compare it.
The American government, however, furnishes an explicit account of all its expenses under the following heads, viz.:—













Dollars.




1.
Senate and House of Representatives, their officers and attendants
314,866 }
125,266



Deduct wages to the members
189,600 }


2.
Firewood, Stationery, PRINTING, and ALL OTHER contingent expenses of the two Houses

49,000


3.
Library of Congress and librarian’s salary

1,950


4.
Purchase of books for the library

1,000




Dollars
177,216



In pounds sterling
£37,608




Not one-third of the expenses which are paid here for the same objects, probably not one-fourth, when it is considered that the stationery, and many other items of expense, are charged to accounts not included under those for the Houses of Lords and Commons.
In our profuse way of doing business, the printing alone, it will be seen, amounts to nearly twice as much as the whole expense of the two houses in America; and if the stationery be added, to much more than twice as much.
Edition: current; Page: [265]
One example in the way of printing may suffice.—In America all the public acts of the Congress are printed at length in the principal newspapers, for which the government pays at the rate of two dollars a column; and no less than Seventy newspapers actually insert the acts and receive the pay. The acts of Congress are printed in the octavo form on coarse paper, and they usually occupy about one hundred pages. Appended to these are the public treaties and other matters relating thereto; an immense number of copies are printed, of which the secretary of state for the current year causes eleven thousand copies to be distributed to the proper persons throughout the United States: the printing of these acts makes one of the items in the fore-named account.
The printing of each 1000 copies of the American acts cannot cost more than 30l.
We, however, disdain this beggarly-looking useful mode, and our acts are accordingly printed in folio on writing paper. Those of the last year occupy 1446 pages, and cannot have cost so little as 1200l. for a thousand copies.
Another pretty specimen of the way in which an irresponsible assembly can vote the public money, may be taken from what is called the Civil List; which is principally composed of the King’s household, and allowances to the other members of the royal family,








And amounted in 1821, to
£1,064,877


Not, however, including further allowance to those members of the royal family, pensions, &c. of
439,229



£1,504,106




But besides this enormous sum, this most monstrous charge, for what may be with more strictness called the civil list, there are other expenses which make the whole amount to 2,878,892l.; which is more than the whole expense of the American government, civil, military, and naval.
A considerable portion of this charge of nearly three millions is called the ordinary charge of the civil list; but besides the ordinary charge, there are enormous annual charges out of the ordinary course. In 1818 an account of these charges was printed by order of the House of Commons, in two papers, Nos. 48. and 49. of that session. The title of these papers is, “Expenses of a civil nature which do not form part of the ordinary charge of the civil list.” Look at these, John Bull, and if they do not make you sick at heart, and if your gall does not rise as your sickness comes on, your apathy is extraordinary. They are comprised under the 14 following heads:—
Edition: current; Page: [266]













£.
s.
d.




1.
Salaries, &c. to officers of the Houses of Lords and Commons
6,293
6
8


2.
Expenses of the two Houses
1,043
14
5


3.
Monuments erecting
3,965
5
0


4.
Conveying governors and other persons of distinction to their places of destination
3,597
13
6


5.
Allowances to admirals of duty on wine drunk at their tables
605
11
0


6.
Salaries and expenses at the receipt of the exchequer
552
6
8


7.
Contingent expense at the treasury and Secretaries of State’s offices
54,147
15
6


8.
Deficiencies of fees made good in the same offices
37,673
13
9


9.
Works and repairs of public buildings
50,938
4
7


10.
Furniture for certain public offices
15,592
9
5


11.
VARIOUS PUBLIC SERVICES
177,938
19
10


12.
Extraordinary disbursements of ambassadors
64,016
14
1


13.
Outfit for secretary of legation at Stockholm
214
16
6


14.
Presents to ministers at foreign courts
33,565
16
7




£450,146
7
6




Thus we see that the extraordinaries, as they are called, of the civil list alone, cost 96,533l. 7s. 6d. more than the whole civil government of America.
The extraordinary disbursements of ambassadors alone cost us 64,016l.
While the whole cost of all sorts of foreign ministers, ordinary and extraordinary, cost the United States 148,500 dollars; or 31,556l.
And yet the diplomatic business of the United States is better performed than that of any other nation whatever.









On the 3d of May, 1822, the House of Commons printed a paper, No. 285., containing an account of the whole of his Majesty’s diplomatic service from 1793 to 1822; from which it appears that the charge for 1821 was

£265,962


That of America, as before
£31,556



Add to this agents for claims for spoliations at Paris and London
850



And for relief and protection of American seamen in foreign countries
8,500



And the total expense will be

£40,906




Edition: current; Page: [267]
Less than one-sixth of the money expended by the government here, much less efficaciously for good purposes, but infinitely more mischievously for bad purposes. The bare charge for diplomatic services costs us more than two-thirds the amount of the whole expense of the civil government in America. Would a House of Commons freely elected by the whole people permit such things as these to exist? Would they ever have sent a minister jobbing to the empty palace at Lisbon, and paid him upwards of 14,000l. for a sea-airing to his family?
In the finance accounts for the year 1821 are the following items:—








Charges of management, customs
£1,069,280


Charges of management, excise
1,133,919



£2,203,199












But the whole cost of the American government, including the civil government, the army, and navy, is
£2,010,220


Or,
192,979




less than the cost of management of the two engines of exaction and patronage, the customs and excise, here at home.
On the 27th March, 1821, the House of Commons printed a “Report from the Committee appointed to prepare the Militia Estimates.” It consisted of two parts, viz.:—













£.
s.
d.




1.
Estimate, charge of DISEMBODIED militia, Great Britain, for 1821
269,519
12
2


2.
Estimate, charge of DISEMBODIED militia, Ireland
125,388
18
11



Total charge of DISEMBODIED militia
£394,908
11
1




Being 41,395l. more than the whole of the civil government of the United States in all its branches.
For the present we purposely exclude all mention of our army, navy, and debt.
So much for taxes in America, as to which we will now leave the Quarterly reviewer to his own reflections. With respect to all the details about provincial courts of justice, we are quite willing to admit that public courts and public officers in remote and thinly-peopled districts may have some of the vices, though none of the useless parade and dignity attached to their fellows in England. We have no time to pursue the subject further, but recommending to this writer and all his tribe Edition: current; Page: [268] the diligent perusal of the President’s last address to Congress, we shall conclude with the following striking passage from the introduction to Mr. Warden’s statistical work:—
“Doubtless the government of the United States is not exempt from the errors and imperfections that adhere to all human institutions. But compare its public conduct with that of the old governments of Europe. How calm and reasonable is its language; always addressing itself to the understanding and the solid interests of the people, never to their passions or prejudices. It seeks no aid from superstition, supports no gainful impostures, and uses none of that disgusting cant with which the old governments of Europe varnish over the degradation of the people. It is a stranger to state craft and mystery. All its acts are done in the face of day. It promotes knowledge, religion, and learning, without the preference of particular sects, and without debasing them by falsehoods beneficial to the ruling powers. It is the only government in the world that dares to put arms freely into the hands of all its citizens. From Maine to Mississipi, it commands a prompt and ready obedience without any other weapon than a constable’s staff. In a word, it secures property, satisfies opinion, promotes the development of industry and talent with a rapidity hitherto unexampled; and with the smallest sacrifice of individual rights and property on the part of the people, it accomplishes all that the most expensive and powerful governments pretend to.”
