
Art. I.: LAW REFORM.
WE are relieved from a part of the labour which, a few years ago, would have been imposed upon us; it being no longer necessary to prove that we have occasion for law reform.
Of the signs of the times—now speaking a language very plain and impressive—this is one. A few years only have gone over our heads, since any imputation of imperfection in the law was resented as a crime against the state; when the unlimited praises of it, vented by generations of lawyers, one after another, for good reasons of their own, were received as implicitly as the axioms of geometry; and he who but sought to moderate the fury of panegyric was deemed the same kind of monster, as he who should have asserted that republicanism has its advantages.
The change has been so great, that now the extreme badness of the law is matter of universal admission; and wonder at the long-suffering stupidity of a people who submitted to such a nuisance is the sentiment bursting from every man’s lips. What is now therefore wanted is, instruction on the nature of the reforms we ought to have.
The ideas which are predominant on this subject are to the last degree defective. They spring from a narrow, mechanical view of the subject.
The present law-contrivances are a set of means for attaining the ends of law. It is acknowledged that they are ill adapted to that attainment. But men who look at the subject, without having studied the principles of it, can only look at the existing contrivances. They see defects and ill-working parts here and there in the machinery; and they are willing to try such changes upon those parts as they think will make them work better. They do not, however, take a full view of the subject. Their mental preparation does not fit them for that. They do not see, nor do they consider, the putting together of the whole. Powers must be put in action for the attainment of any end which is not spontaneous,—that of law in the same way as other Edition: current; Page: [2] ends. But it is evident that a combination of powers for the attainment of an end will work well or ill according to the mode of the combination. It is not enough that all the requisite powers are there; they must be so combined as to co-operate without obstruction, and with the greatest effect, to the attainment of that which is the object of their combination. A machine which is vicious in its original construction may be patched and patched to the end of time; and nothing but a blundering, ill-working instrument will, after all, be produced.
It is with a view to aid in removing the weakness of which we speak in the public mind, that the present article has been undertaken. We wish to give a specimen, however imperfect, of the mode of looking at the parts of a combination of means for attaining the ends of law, in the connexion they have with one another, and their common subserviency to the common end.
The meaning of the word Law (a word of too many acceptations), in the phrase “Reform of the Law,” is fixed, by usage, with considerable precision. It means the rules according to which the tribunals determine questions about rights, and punish the violation of them. The business of the tribunals is thus, in one word—protection; and that which they are appointed to protect, is rights.
As things are managed in England, that protection—upon which we observe, by the by, that all the happiness of society depends—is most imperfectly afforded. Under the pretence of affording it, other ends, and those directly opposed to it, have been most successfully pursued. This is now seen. And the inquiry therefore comes.—In what way is the remedy to be applied?
Towards the solution of that question, the first thing undoubtedly is, to determine what are the requisites of that protection,—what are the conditions essential to its existence. This is no very abstruse inquiry. In fact, all the inquiries of jurisprudence are of a very simple nature. They only seek to discover the common-sense road to a common-sense end.
It is easy to see that the first thing requisite for the protection of rights is, that they shall be known: if they are unknown, protection cannot be afforded; and, in proportion as they are imperfectly known, the protection of them must be imperfect.
Rights are constituted by the supreme power of the state. Nothing is, properly speaking, a right, but that which the supreme power wills to be a right; and to which, more or less perfectly, it yields protection.
Edition: current; Page: [3]
There are two ways in which this will of the supreme power is made known; either by express declaration in words; or by habitual acquiescence in what has grown up among the people themselves. Both modes exist in England. When the will of the supreme power is made known by words, we call the law statute law; when it is by acquiescence in custom, it is called common, or customary law. The greater part of the law of England is still in this last barbarous state.
In all countries, which are not pretty far advanced in civilization, there is no law but custom. The will of the supreme power with regard to rights is not expressed in words at all. It is only expressed by its acquiescence in the existing customs, and the enforcement which, with more or less regularity, it affords to them. This, for example, is the state of law in our widely-extended dominions in India; and now, for the first time, has the British legislature wisely given order that this most imperfect expression of the will of the supreme power shall be exchanged for the more perfect expression by words.
Where custom, acquiesced in, is the only law, the custom itself has often need to be proved. The judge takes evidence of it in the same way as of any other fact, and admits all the same media of proof. English law pursues a course of its own in this respect. It admits nothing as evidence of a custom of this kind (allowing for exceptions, of which there are some), but the decisions of the judges. In such a country as India, there are no recorded decisions of the judges, and this medium of proof is inaccessible; the judges, therefore, are left to the plain business of taking evidence in the plain and ordinary way. What a fabric of mysterious science—if the word science may be desecrated by using it in so unholy a combination—English lawyers have erected upon this ground, is sufficiently known. The question is often propounded, what this law, called common law, is; and nobody has yet given a satisfactory answer. Mr. Bentham affirmed that it is a non-entity,—a fiction set up, on each occasion, by the judge, to which he gives the effect of law; that is, he makes a law for each particular occasion; for which reason Mr. Bentham called it also judge-made law, and ex post facto law.
English lawyers have been very much at a loss to give an intelligible account of what it is they do on those occasions. They abjure the thought of making a law. The judges (that is their language) declare the law,—do not make it. But it is a curious case of declaring. To declare a law, it must exist; the common law, however, exists nowhere. Decisions of judges exist, but they are on particular cases, and Edition: current; Page: [4] are not laws*. When a new case occurs, that is, a case to which no decided cases very similar can be found, the lawyers look out for such as come the nearest to it, and then they decide by what they call analogy; which means, similitude of proportion, or of reason. They suppose a reason as the ground of the decision in the decided case, and they determine that the reason applies to the case in hand.
This is law in a very unsatisfactory state. What shall be a man’s right, does not in such circumstances depend upon the will of the legislature expressed in a general rule, but upon the individual will of the judge, applied to an individual case. Reason tends always to take law out of this state. It is not safe to allow the judge any power over the law†; his business is, after investigation, to say under what class of cases, provided for by the legislature, the individual case which he has to deal with is included.
The real nature of the operation performed by the judge in a case of common law is mistaken by English lawyers universally, and utterly hidden from view by their language. For the ground of every decision at common law, it is assumed that there is a custom. Customary law without a custom is a contradiction in terms. To prove the existence of the custom, they adduce such decisions of the judges as would be supported by the custom if it existed; and they admit no other kind of evidence to establish its existence. It is very evident that a rule of action made out of such materials must be exceedingly imperfect. First of all, a custom is seldom anything very precise; the notion of it is almost always confused and unsteady, to a greater or less degree. In the next place, the decisions of judges are often not good evidence of a custom; the decision of a judge is only evidence that he inferred a custom: but whether properly or improperly remains to be inquired. Again, it often happens that there are conflicting decisions. Next, the cases upon which any decision has been passed may, nono of them, have more than a faint similitude to the case which stands for the decision of the judge, or indicate precisely any custom within which it can be said to fall. The judge, however, pursues his course; a custom he resolves there shall be. He calls it a law. It is a law in a dormant, alias nonexistent, state. He supposes, therefore, such a law as he pleases, and thereupon decides.
Edition: current; Page: [5]
Besides the obvious and enormous imperfections of a rule of action which is only a custom, the other portion of our law, expressed in the words of the legislature, is in a most deplorable state. It has been made upon no plan. The parts of it have been produced upon the spur of the occasion. Each enactment has been squared to the present emergency; and thus, frequently, we have enactment upon enactment, to any amount, upon parts of a subject, which might all have been included, and much better included, in one. Besides this total want of order and method in our law-book, the style in which the laws are written is the worst possible; it is loaded with useless words, to a degree which would be utterly ridiculous, if custom, and the reverence due to the subject, did not repress the natural emotion. This faulty expression is very often the cause of ambiguity and uncertainty, and obscures the meaning to all but those who have been called upon to make a study of it. A consequence of this unskilled and rude composition is, that the volume of the law is swelled to so enormous a size, that a complete knowledge of it is the next thing to impossible; and the mass of the people are placed in helpless dependence on the class of lawyers to whom the knowledge is by that means confined. As our thinking countrymen are so much more accustomed and willing to be guided by authority than by reason, we shall here give them a delineation of our law, by a man who had quite propensity enough to over-praise it, and was very seldom restrained from using his lavish hand,—we mean, the famous Lord Erskine.

‘I expressed to my learned conductor the strongest desire to see the Book in which their decisions and statutes were compiled and registered for public instruction and the administration of justice.—He smiled very significantly, saying he would carry me to where my curiosity should be indulged, and, in a few minutes afterwards, we arrived at a house, from whence I expected to carry home under my arm the volume I had been promised:—it was one of the great libraries of the country, being the property of a nobleman, in whose family books had been accumulating for centuries, and who preserved them in the utmost regularity and order.
We were shown into a spacious apartment, handsomely fitted up and provided with ladders, such as are common in England, for reaching their highest orders. I was greatly struck with the immense number of volumes, in the view of which, however, my learned conductor interrupted me, by saying, that, as our time was limited, we must not waste it in one part of the library, as it was divided into different chambers, in which the books were classed according to their subjects. I was surprised at this, and told him, that though England was more famous for literature of every character and description than Edition: current; Page: [6] any nation of our world, yet I had conceived the hall we were leaving contained the whole collection. “The whole collection!” he re-echoed with the utmost seeming amazement—“why, my dear stranger, they are only his Law-books.” “What do you mean?” I answered, with equal surprise on my part, as the reader may well believe—“what law-books? Have you communications then with the planets and fixed stars, and made a digest of all their institutions?” “Oh, no,” he said, “they are only books of very local jurisdiction—they are our own laws only.—Those on your right hand,” pointing as far as we could see, “are our decisions—and those on your left are our statutes.” I stood silent for a while, and then broke out with an astonishment I could not conceal—“If this he really so, how are your people to know by what rules they are to govern themselves, what duties they are to perform, or how to avoid the penalties annexed to disobedience?” “Nothing so easy,” replied my learned conductor; “nothing in either of our worlds so perfectly plain and simple,” laying his hand, at the same time, on what seemed to correspond with some of the indexes in our own books—“what shall I find for you?—I will turn to it in a second.”—“Turn then,” I said, “to your law for preventing infection from the plague”—for I had been told they had regulations for quarantine. “Here it is,” said the Armatan counsellor, as he read the title; but he had not proceeded ten lines in the enacting part, when we found it principally related to the smuggling of chew-chum, a leaf resembling our tobacco. “Oh,” said he, on my laughing at the discordancy, “this is a mere mistake, depend upon it, some misprinting—let me turn to another.” “Well then,” I said, “find me the law which regulates your marriages;” which he turned up accordingly in a moment, and read its title with an air of triumph; but he had not read far, when we found it mostly related to horned cattle—he was now rather disconcerted, when I laughed, and said to him, “Oh, this can only be a misprinting—try something else—let me see the act which regulates the functions of your bishops and clergy.” “That I can do,” he replied; “it is now,” he said, “before you,” as he read the title; but there was little in the body of it, except as to passing women with child of bastards, to their proper parishes, as we at least should call them. It was now my turn to triumph, and I could not help exclaiming, “You have found it at last, have you?—your women, I hope, don’t swear their bastards to your bishops and clergy? I will now positively give you but one chance more, and you must find me at once something consistent, or I will go back again to England, and send over Lord Stanhope to thump you.”—Alas! I little thought how soon he was to be lost to ourselves!
He now turned, by my desire, and as his last effort, to an act against bribery and corruption, the title of which he was not long in finding, but so little was the concordance of the enactment, that, on the contrary, it only continued and secured the constitutions of their rotten boroughs.
“As he went on, referring to the decisions of their courts, he was frequently in the same manner most sorely puzzled.—Sometimes he found a case settled, and told me it was undoubted law; but on looking farther, he often informed me that it had been afterwards settled the Edition: current; Page: [7] other way, and in a subsequent volume, which he turned to, he frequently discovered that the last decision was clogged with exceptions which supported neither; but that, by still looking onward, he could show me how it was settled at last;—he accordingly found some of his cases, but they had many times stood over for another argument, and had never been decided.
In this way he went on, until he was driven in the end to admit that if a young man were to begin to read all the books of their laws, written and unwritten, public and private, on his first entering their courts, he would be superannuated before he got through them.’

—Armata, Part II., p. 135—140.


As a deep conviction of the weight of the grievance, of which we crave the redress, is the first step in order to its attainment, we shall produce another account of it, though forming a longer quotation than we could have wished, given by a lawyer of great authority—the late Sir Samuel Romilly.

‘In spite of the panegyrics which have been so often pronounced upon our laws, and upon the administration of them, no person who is practically acquainted with our English system of jurisprudence, and who will speak of it ingenuously, can deny that it is attended with great and numerous mischiefs, which are every day becoming more intolerable. The difficulties, the expense, the tedious length of litigations, the uncertainty of their issue, and, in many cases, the lamentable delay of decision, are but too well known to the great number to whom all this is a source of profit, and to the far greater number on whom it brings down calamity and ruin. What are the causes of these evils it would be rash in any one to pronounce, before he had fully and anxiously examined every part of the subject. They are evils, however, of such magnitude, that every discussion which affords a chance of leading us to the discovery of their causes, and consequently to the providing against them an effectual remedy, must be regarded as highly beneficial. Considered in this point of view, the question, whether the common, or unwritten law, be better calculated than a written code, to provide effectually for the security of men’s persons and properties, in a state as far advanced as England is in civilization and refinement, is one of very great public interest; and we shall therefore make no apology for proceeding to the discussion of it, or for mixing arguments of our own with those, which either we have found in the work before us, or have been suggested by its perusal.
The first step to be taken in this inquiry is to ascertain the nature of the unwritten law, by which England is at this moment governed. We are not then to understand that the rules by which property is to be distributed, and the conduct of men to be regulated, really exist only in oral tradition, and the imperfect recollections of individuals. What is called with us unwritten law is in truth to be collected from a great number of written records and printed volumes; and, according to old Fortescue and to Blackstone, it is only by a twenty years’ study of them that a perfect knowledge of it can be gained. It is by reading, and by Edition: current; Page: [8] reading only, that the lex non scripta, as well as the statute law, is to be acquired; but, in the one case, we find the law expressing its commands in direct and positive terms—while, in the other, we can arrive at a knowledge of it only through its interpreters and oracles—the judges.
The common law is to be collected, not from the plain text of a comprehensive ordinance, which is open to all men to consult, but from the decisions of courts of justice, pronounced in a great variety of cases, and which have disclosed small portions of it from time to time, just as the miscellaneous transactions of men in a state of society may have chanced to require, or give occasion for its promulgation.
Of a law so constituted, it must necessarily happen that a large portion must always remain unpublished. The occasion for declaring it never having occurred, it must rest (as all that is now published once did) in a latent state, till some event happens to call it into use and into notice. Of a statute law, we know with certainty the whole extent,—and we can at once discern what it has not, as well as what it has provided; but under the common law there is no case unprovided for,—though there may be many of which it is extremely difficult, and indeed impossible, to say beforehand what the provision is. For the cases on which no decision has yet been pronounced, an unknown law exists, which must be brought to light whenever the courts are called upon for their decision. For all practical purposes, a law so unknown is the same as a law not in existence; to declare, is substantially to enact it; and the judges, though called only expounders of law, are in reality legislators. Of what importance is it, that, by a legal fiction, the law is supposed to have had pre-existence, since, being unknown till it was promulgated by some tribunal, it was not possible that men could have conformed to it as the rule of their conduct?—and yet, in this very circumstance, have some most eminent lawyers discovered a superiority in the common law over all written statutes. Lord Mansfield, for example, when pleading as an advocate at the bar, is reported to have thus expressed himself:—“Cases of law depend upon occasions which give rise to them. All occasions do not arise at once. A statute very seldom can take in all cases; therefore the common law, that works itself pure by rules drawn from the fountains of justice, is superior to an act of Parliament.”
The law, thus unknown to others till it was promulgated in some decision, can hardly be said to have been previously known, even to the judges themselves. When some new question is brought before them to decide, those oracles of the law do not, like the oracles of old, (the supposed sources of all wisdom and knowledge,) immediately pronounce their authoritative and unerring responses; neither do they retire to their chambers, as if to consult some code of which they are the sole possessors, and then reveal in public, to the contending parties, the text which they have discovered. They profess themselves unqualified immediately to decide: they require to be themselves informed: it is necessary that they should hear, and compare, and examine, and reason, and be assisted by the arguments of others, before they are prepared to pronounce Edition: current; Page: [9] what the law has declared. They even call upon the litigant parties themselves to state by their advocates, what they conceive the law to be, and to support their statements by reasoning and authorities, and analogous decisions; and it sometimes happens that, even with all this assistance, the judges find themselves unable to declare what the law is, and require the assistance of a second argument, and by other counsel.
That all these deliberations, and this laborious process, should be necessary, will not appear surprising to those who reflect what is the nature of the operation to be performed, when we would discover what the common law is upon some point upon which it has never yet been declared. Dr. Paley calls it, and not unaptly, a competition of opposite analogies. “When a point of law,” he says, “has been once adjudged, neither that question, nor any which completely, and in all its circumstances, corresponds with that, can be brought a second time into dispute; but questions arise which resemble this only indirectly, and in part, and in certain views and circumstances, and which may seem to bear an equal, or a greater affinity, to other adjudged cases; questions which can be brought within any fixed rule only by analogy, and which hold an analogy by relation to different rules. It is by the urging of the different analogies that the contention of the bar is carried on; and it is in the comparison, adjustment, and reconciliation of them with one another, in the discerning of such distinctions, and in the framing of such a determination, as may either save the various rules alleged in the cause, or, if that be impossible, may give up the weaker analogy to the stronger, that the sagacity and wisdom of the court are seen and exercised.” The common law was covered with a veil of antiquity;—that veil has been, by the decisions of the judges, in part removed: what it is that still remains concealed from the public view no one can with certainty tell. Nothing is left us but to conjecture, and our conjectures are wholly founded upon those various analogies of which Paley speaks. The best supported of those analogies is that which generally prevails; it is acknowledged, from that moment, as the law of the land, and as a point from which other analogies may in future be drawn.
It is not a little amusing to hear what Blackstone (who is, upon almost all occasions, the apologist for what he finds established) says of this unwritten law:—“The moment,” these are his words, “that a decision has been pronounced, that which was before uncertain, and perhaps indifferent, becomes a permanent rule, which it is not in the breast of any subsequent judge to alter or vary from;” and he accordingly tells us, that “it is an established rule to abide by former precedents, where the same point comes again in litigation.” How, indeed, should it be otherwise? Where the authority of a written text cannot be referred to, it is from decisions alone that the law can be collected; and it should seem to be as necessary for those who administer the law to follow those decisions implicitly, as to obey the plain injunctions of a statute: and yet, according to Blackstone, “this rule admits of exception, where the former determination is most evidently contrary to reason, and much more, if it be clearly contrary to the Divine law.” Edition: current; Page: [10] Here are other sources, then, from which we are to collect the unwritten law—namely, the dictates of reason, and the declared will of God. But, unfortunately, the dictates of reason, which are at all times sufficiently uncertain as a positive rule of conduct, are rendered much more uncertain by the learned Commentator’s explanation. For, in many cases, he tells us—the reason of a law cannot be discovered by any sagacity, and yet must be presumed to exist; and he proceeds to lay it down, as a maxim of English jurisprudence, that it is only where a precedent, or the rule which it has established, is flatly absurd or unjust, that its authority may be disregarded. The Cambridge professor, who has commented upon the Commentaries, controverts even this position, and most satisfactorily proves, that absolute demonstration of the absurdity and injustice of a rule, is not alone sufficient, at the common law, to detract from its binding force. By the law of England, till the Legislature interposed to alter it, every statute had a retrospective operation to the first day of the Sessions in which it passed; and acts, therefore, which were done after the Sessions had commenced, and before the law was made, fell under the animadversion of its ex post facto enactments, and subjected the author of them to the penalty of having disregarded prohibitions which had no existence. A stronger instance to prove that absurdity and injustice are not incompatible with a rule of the common law, could not have been adduced.
This source of uncertainty becomes the more formidable, from the consideration that the judges are themselves to determine, whether the former decision was or was not contrary to reason; or, in other words, whether it shall or shall not be binding on them. It must always, therefore, be in the power of the judge, notwithstanding the oath which we are told he takes, “to determine, not according to his own private judgment, but according to the known laws and customs of the land.” To relieve himself from embarrassing precedents which may be cited, he has only to declare, that those precedents are contrary to reason, and were therefore themselves deviations from the common law, and to profess, in the language of Mr. Justice Blackstone, that he is “not making a new law, but vindicating the old from misrepresentation.” This doctrine, that former determinations are of authority only as they are consistent with reason, affords, in the opinion of the same writer, good ground for those high-strained panegyrics of the law which are so often pronounced by our judges. “Hence,” to use his own words, “it is that our lawyers with justice tell us, that the law is the perfection of reason, and that what is not reason is not law.” An aphorism which is, however, involved in such a cloud of mystery, that we are at the same time told, that not even the judges can, upon all occasions, discover in what that reason, the test of genuine law, consists; and that they are bound to hold everything which they find decided by their predecessors to be law, and consequently the perfection of reason, unless it be “flatly absurd or unjust.” In contemplation of law, there is no medium, it seems, between the perfection of reason and gross absurdity.
Not to deceive ourselves, however, we ought to understand, that this Edition: current; Page: [11] supposed bringing to light of the ancient law, which had been for ages unrevealed, is at best but a fiction. The law so declared in many cases had no existence till the declaration was made, although the judges do not “pretend to make new law,” but “to vindicate the old from misrepresentation.” It has already been observed, that where the whole law is embodied in written statutes, cases may occur on which the law is silent; but where an unwritten law prevails, this can never happen. That the law is not already declared is only because the particular occasion for declaring it never before occurred. The judges being unable, therefore, to predicate of any case that it is one which the law has not foreseen, are under the necessity, with the aid of Dr. Paley’s Analogies, of supplying what is wanting, and of discovering the ancient law which is supposed to have been once expressed in statutes that have long since mouldered away, or to have been pronounced in judgments of which no record has been preserved. In name, this differs from making laws,—but it is only in name. Whether the chasm has been made by the ravages of time, or was left in the original fabric of our law, it is precisely by the same process that it must be filled up. The same recourse must be had to Paley’s Analogies, whether the object of the judges be to conjecture what the lost law must have been, or to make a new law, which will best quadrate and harmonize with the relics of the old*.”

Sir Samuel goes on, at some length, exposing the defects of this species of law, and then adds:—

‘Such are among the principal objections to this species of legislation. But it is to be observed that, while this is going on, there is amongst us a legislation of another kind, proceeding with equal activity—that of the avowed and acknowledged legislature, which every year sends into the world a cumbrous Collection of new Statutes. Between these two legislatures there is no unity of design; their works are as unlike as the characters of the authors and their modes of legislation. Of a law, proceeding from such sources, it is not surprising that it is found to be uncertain, intricate, obscure, perplexed, inconsistent, full of refinement and subtlety, and subject to continual fluctuations. The law which is every term discovered and brought to light by the judges, seems to vic in extent with that which is made by the Parliament; and the lawyer’s library is every year enlarged by one bulky volume of statutes, and by several volumes of reported decisions. The new statutes of each year are swollen out to a bulk surpassing that of the year which preceded it; and every fresh term seems to be prolific of more judicial reports than the term that went before it. So considerable are the changes and augmentations which are thus continually taking place in English law, that the treatises, essays, and compilations, which have been composed on various legal subjects, require to be from time to time renewed, that they may not mislead those who consult them; and, upon many heads, an old law treatise is of as little use as an almanack for a year that has expired. The duties of a justice of the peace were formerly comprised Edition: current; Page: [12] in one small duodecimo volume; they are now to be searched for in five large octavos, containing altogether 4400 pages. To this size “Burn’s Justice” has been gradually expanded, in the course of the twenty-two editions which, during a period of sixty years, it has passed through. So many new reports have been printed, and so many new statutes made, that, as the publisher tells us in the advertisement to the fifteenth edition, “every new edition, in order to keep pace with the law, is in effect a new book.” ’

—p. 223.


We do not suppose that another word is necessary to be said, in order to show the necessity of having our law better expressed. This is one of the strongest of all the dictates of common sense. If anything requires to be well expressed, it is the law. If anything requires to be laid down, orderly, clearly, unambiguously, succinctly, it is the law—upon which depends the security of everything which we enjoy.*
It is necessary here to obviate a blunder, or a misrepresentation, which, though very stupid, is very common. When we speak of expressing the law better, we mean nothing else. We mean not to alter the law in a tittle. We mean to improve the expression—to make that clear, which is now obscure—that distinct, which is now ambiguous—that orderly, which is now a mass of disorder—that succinct, which is now prolix, to a degree altogether intolerable—and that easy to be known, which is now almost beyond comprehension.
But men have gotten it into their heads, that to make a code is to make new laws—that to make a code, the existing laws are to be swept away, and a new set put in their place. With that belief, they have a horror of codification; and if they were right in the belief, we should most assuredly join with them in the horror. This would be tantamount to a scheme of universal confiscation. It would be to begin by destroying all rights, that Edition: current; Page: [13] we might proceed to establish others; a project so pregnant with human misery, that the most frightful of tyrants, in their maddest fits, never conceived anything which approached it.
Rights are not touched by codification. Rights, which are now ill expressed, will, by codification, be well expressed; and that is the whole matter. Every man’s right is then a better thing for him than it was before. The protection of it, which is that alone which gives it value, is better provided for. The good expression of rights is the first of the conditions on which perfect protection of them comes within the verge of possibility.
Another thing with which men frighten themselves, in regard to this great service due to the community, is its difficulty. They tell us that they see the importance of codification: but how, they cry, is it to be done?—How is it to be done!—Why, by working at it, to be sure. Is anything else done but by being worked at? And what right have we to talk of difficulties till we have tried to overcome them? Many things which appear great difficulties at a distance are found of tolerably easy management when we approach them: so it will be found with codification. Good God! cannot we write the law over again? And have we not men among us who can marshal disordered ideas, and put every one of them in its proper place, with its proper expression?—That is all. The subject is large, and the work is therefore extensive: it is difficult in that sense, because there is a great deal to be done—because it must be done with accuracy, and accurate work is slow. But what other difficulty is there, if the proper men are applied to the task?
Having said thus much on the first of the requisites of law reform—the perfecting of the text of the law—we have only to proceed to the instruments by means of which the law is secured of its effects. The law; and its instruments;—these are the two subjects, and the only two, which enter into the consideration of him whose desire it is that the ends of law should be attained.
The first of the instruments of law is the judge. When there is any question about a right, or the violation of a right, a third party must be called to decide—as few men are fair judges when the case is their own. Our next inquiry therefore is, in what manner judges can be employed with most advantage for the attainment of the ends of law—in other words, the protection of rights.
Every step in this inquiry is so obvious and certain, that we may expect acquiescence in each proposition on the very first announcement.
In the first place, it is clear that you must have judges sufficient in number to decide all the questions which arise. It is Edition: current; Page: [14] not less clear, that they ought to be distributed in such a manner as best to suit the convenience of those who have occasion for their intervention—that is, to be so located, that the suitors may have the smallest distance to go, in order to obtain the service which they require. It is the clear dictate then of reason, that there ought to be a judge in every district of a convenient size: that convenience depending mainly on three things—the amount of the population, the facility of access, and the means of the community to bear the expense.
It is not less clearly the dictate of reason, that each local judge should perform the whole of the judicial business of the district. The convenience secured by this is most material. It is obviously important, that each judge should have as much to do as he can well perform; that all unnecessary expense may be avoided. In the next place, the advantage is great of having the district small to which his services are allotted, that he may be easy of access. These advantages are combined, by giving to one man the whole of the judicial business of every kind. Suppose you were to divide the business between two: if you give the men full employment, you must have the district twice as large as it would otherwise need to be, and the difficulty of access on the part of the suitor twice as great, without any advantage whatever; whether you take for the principle of your division suits classed according to the amount of the property in litigation, or any other distinction.
This being determined, we see clearly what comes next for consideration. Having a judge in every district who performs the whole of the judicial business of the district, we should have done enough, as far as judges are concerned, if we were certain that those judges would all do their duty. We are, however, certain of the contrary; we must, therefore, have the means of correcting their errors, whether the effect of weakness, negligence, or corruption. The suitors must have justice. If a suitor is dissatisfied with the decision which has been passed in his case, there ought to be somebody else to whom he can apply for a revisal of the decision: that is to say, there ought to be a judge of appeal. This is found by experience, and is easily seen by reason, to be the grand security against misdecision. We are then to investigate the means by which courts of appeal may be made to yield us this security with greatest advantage.
In this, as in most of the things which are to be done for the correct administration of law, the simplest expedient is the best. When the proceeding of the original judge is revised by a revising judge, the object is accomplished.
It has been made a question—whether, when you have obtained Edition: current; Page: [15] one revisal, you ought not, for greater security, to have a second? namely, a revisal of the revisal.
The minds of the men who are entitled to have an opinion on this subject seem to be made up. It is generally allowed that there ought to be but one stage of appeal. This is placed beyond controversy, when it is considered that you add nothing to your security for right decision by adding to the number of appeals. You can have no greater reason for trusting to a second revisal than to the first—to a third than to the second, and so on. With each of these appeals, however, you have the mischief of delay and expense, without any the smallest advantage.
A question here occurs which applies to judges of both kinds, both the original judge and the judge in appeal. The question is—whether there ought to be one judge for one question, or whether each question ought to be decided by more judges than one?
Common sense appears to be perfectly equal to the solution of this question. If your judge is a competent man, he can decide the question properly without any assistance. Then why give him that of which he has no need? By this you multiply expense, and secure not any concomitant advantage. If you add incompetent men to the competent one, you only embarrass his proceedings, and delay or perhaps disfigure the decision. If you add other competent men, you do what is unnecessary—you increase your expense, and lose the inestimable advantages of prompt decision and of concentrated responsibility.
There ought clearly, then, to be one judge for one question, whether it be the original question or the appellate one: that is, in other words, each tribunal, whether a tribunal of original jurisdiction, or a tribunal of appellate jurisdiction, ought to consist of one judge.
Thus, all the questions which regard the establishment of judges are solved. There ought to be two sets of tribunals, one for the original jurisdiction, and one for appellate jurisdiction. These tribunals ought to be sufficiently numerous to do the judicial business of the country without delay; and the tribunals of original jurisdiction ought to be so located as to suit, in the highest degree, the convenience of those who have occasion to apply to them.
The location of the appellate tribunals is to be determined by considering what is their proper business; or, in other word, what that is in which appellate jurisdiction properly consists.
This is a question of great importance; and it is one on Edition: current; Page: [16] which even those who speculate about law have not yet all attained very clear ideas.
We have already called it by its proper name—Revisal. It is the revisal of the proceedings of the original judge, upon a complaint of one of the suitors that a wrong decision has been pronounced. Misdecision always arises from one of three causes—either because the point, on which the question of right depends, has not been properly determined; because the evidence has not been duly and properly weighed; or because evidence which ought to have been taken has been omitted.
It is evident that the question on the first two points can be determined by inspection of the record, the written statement of the pleadings, and the written statement of the evidence. On the third point, the court of appeal decides either that all the evidence has been taken which ought to have been, or that it has not. If the former, the suit is determined; if the latter, it is the business of the appellate court to remit the cause to the original court, with an order to take the omitted evidence, and give its decision afresh.
It is of great importance to remark (for in conceiving the business of appellate judicature confusion of ideas has prevailed to a lamentable degree) that it is no part of the business of an appellate judicatory to take evidence. When evidence is taken by an appellate court, the cause is tried over again. Your court of appeal discharges the function not of a court of appeal, but a court of original jurisdiction; while the decision of the original court passes for nothing at all: it is so much lost time, lost labour, and lost expense.
This being settled, and it thus appearing that whatever has to be done by the court of appeal is to be grounded on what appears on the written record of the proceedings before the original judge, there is no such necessity for proximity to the suitors in the case of appeal courts, as in that of courts of original jurisdiction. The presence of parties and the presence of witnesses is essential in the original court; neither is necessary in the court of appeal. The written record of the proceedings of the original court may travel by post; and whether it travels ten miles or a hundred miles, is of no importance. The place where the best public is found—where the eye of intelligent spectators is likely to act with greatest efficiency, is the best situation for courts of appeal. That, generally speaking, is the metropolis; and, in England, there is no doubt about the matter. The distance in England of the metropolis from the most remote parts of the kingdom would produce little inconvenience in the business of appeal.
Edition: current; Page: [17]
The idea, then, of the reform to be aimed at in the constitution of our courts is sufficiently simple. We ought to have courts of original jurisdiction, at convenient distances, all over the country; and we ought to have judges of appeal in Westminster Hall. The number of the judges of appeal should, of course, be proportioned to the business to be done; each, in his own court, deciding individual questions alone; and all deliberating together when any point is to be determined whereon uniformity of decision may depend.
We do not enter into any argument to show the utility of this constitution of courts, because its perfect adaptation to the ends which all profess to have in view must inevitably be seen by every man who will take the trouble to apply his reason to the case. We deem it, however, of importance to give an idea of the dreadful state we are in with respect to courts, as matters are at present arranged, in the best governed country in the world; and it is fortunate that we can present a delineation of a great part of it by a master-hand.
Mr. (now Lord) Brougham, in his celebrated speech on Law Reform in the House of Commons, on the 7th Feb. 1828, said:

‘I invite you then, Sir, to enter upon an unsparing examination of this mighty subject; I invite the House to proceed with me, first of all, into the different courts—to mark what failures, in practice, are to be found in the system, as it was originally framed, as well as what errors time has engendered by occasioning a departure from that system; and afterwards to consider whether we may not, safely and usefully, apply to those defects remedies of a seasonable and temperate nature, restoring what is decayed, if it be good—lopping off what experience has proved to be pernicious.
I.—1. In the first place, let us proceed to the courts in Westminster Hall, and observe the course pursued in them. The House is aware that, whatever may have been the original of our three great common law courts, they now deal with nearly the same description of suits; and that, though the jurisdiction of each was at first separate, and confined within very narrow limits, their functions are now nearly the same. The jurisdiction of the Court of King’s Bench, for example, was originally confined to pleas of the crown, and then extended to actions where violence was used—actions of trespass by force; but, now, all actions are admissible within its walls, through the medium of a legal fiction, adopted for the purpose of enlarging its authority, that every person sued is in the custody of the marshal of the court, and may, therefore, be proceeded against for any personal cause of action. Thus, by degrees, this court has drawn over to itself actions, which really belong to the great forum of ordinary actions between subject and subject, as its name implies, the Court of Common Pleas. The Court of Common Pleas, however, in its exertions for extending its business, was not so fortunate as its rival: for, though it made a vigorous attempt, Edition: current; Page: [18] under Lord Chief Justice North, to enlarge its sphere, it never was able to obtain cognizance of the peculiar subject of King’s Bench jurisdiction—Crown Pleas.
The Exchequer has adopted a similar course; for, though it was originally confined to the trial of revenue cases, it has, by means of another fiction—the supposition that everybody sued is a debtor to the crown, and further that he cannot pay his debt because the other party will not pay him—opened its doors to every suitor, and so drawn to itself the right of trying cases that were never intended to be placed within its jurisdiction.
The first state of the courts being that of distinct jurisdiction, then of course this separation of provinces was praised; afterwards, all distinction became obsolete, and then the conflict and competition were as much commended; and with far greater reason if the competition were real; but it is almost purely speculative. In the first place, the Court of Common Pleas shuts its doors to many practitioners of the law, by requiring that a certain proportion of fees should be advanced at a much earlier stage in the cause than is customary in the other courts. For who is it that must advance this money? Either the attorney himself, if it be his own cause, must pay the money out of his own pocket, or, if he is acting as agent for a country practitioner, he must begin by laying out the money long before he can draw upon his employer for reimbursement, and he is not, in all cases, sure of being repaid for those advances. In the second place, clients and their attornies are induced not to carry causes into the Common Pleas, by the strict monopoly that exists in the advocates of that court.
The Exchequer, in like manner, has its drawbacks, though they operate in another way. There is one reason why, as at present constituted, it cannot do much business, or have the high reputation which it ought to enjoy; I mean the mixture of various suits which are cognizable in it. It is, in fact, a court of all sorts—of equity and of law—of revenue law and of ordinary law—of law between subject and subject, as well as of law between the subject and the crown. This makes suitors, seeing the business done in so many different ways, come to the conclusion that it is not well done in any.
What, then, is the natural consequences of those restrictions which prevent suitors from approaching the Courts of Common Pleas and Exchequer? Why, it is this—wherever there is but little business done in any court, those in power are induced not to place the strongest judge in that situation; then, the small portion of business to be done renders the judge less fit for his office; and so, by action and re-action, while the little business makes the bench and the bar less able, the inferior ability of the court still further reduces that little business.
Experiments have been tried to lighten the business of the Court of King’s Bench: but I do not find that any of them have answered the purpose for which they were instituted. The first of these attempts was made in the year 1821, when it was arranged that the Chief Justice should sit in one court, and a puisne judge in another, at the same time; but never did any arrangement fail more completely. The court Edition: current; Page: [19] in which the puisne judge sat remained almost idle, while the other court was as constantly preferred, and nearly as much overloaded as before. Little else was effected but a great inconvenience both to practitioners and suitors, by the passing and repassing from court to court. In fact, it is not in the power of the courts, even were all monopolies and other restrictions done away, to distribute business equally, as long as the suitors are left free to choose their tribunal. There will always be a favourite court; and the circumstance of its being preferred tends to make it more deserving of preference; for if the favour towards it began in mere caprice, the great amount of business draws thither the best practitioners, to say nothing of judges; and the better the court, the greater will be its business. The same action and re-action will operate favourably, which I before showed in its unfavourable effects where a court was declining—Possunt quia posse videntur. The experiment of 1821, having failed entirely, was not repeated.
Another attempt has subsequently been made to relieve the Court of King’s Bench from the pressure of term business, which must always bear a proportion to the Nisi Prius causes. This system is still going on under the bill brought into the House by the present Chancellor, and of which though he was induced to patronise it officially when Solicitor-General, I have reason to believe he never much approved. As this arrangement is compulsory, the client having no choice, it cannot well fail; but I heartily wish that it had failed, for it has done much mischief, and is certainly one of the worst changes that has ever taken place. It is true, the great pressure of business requires that something should be done; but it is equally true that the right thing has not been adopted; for, where the King’s Bench sits, with the Chief Justice presiding—where the suitors resort—where the bar is mustered—where the public attend—where all the council and attorneys appear—where the business is disposed of, as it ought to be, gravely and deliberately, with the eyes of mankind, with the eyes of the bar, as well as of the world at large, turned on the proceedings—would not every one point to that as the place in which all important legal questions ought to be decided? Would not any one, on the other hand, say, if another court were constituted in a sort of back room, where three judges were sitting—where the only persons present, besides the judges, were the counsel and attorney employed on either side of the cause that was pending—where there was no audience, and the public eye was entirely directed not upon but from that to the other court—would not any one, I ask, declare, that a court so circumstanced was the place in which the trifling business alone should be transacted? These, I think, would be but natural conclusions; and yet if the matter be stated exactly the other way, it will be far nearer the truth. Of the really important business, as regards both its difficulty and importance to the law, and, indeed, to the suitor, a very large proportion is done in that back room, and before those three judges; it is done in a corner, and, I may say, disposed of behind people’s backs, with only the attendance of the attorney and barrister on each side, or, at most, with the presence of these and of the practitioners waiting for the next cause; and as the court is not frequented Edition: current; Page: [20] by the public any more than the profession, the business may certainly be said to be transacted without due publicity and solemnity. Thus we see, that by this arrangement, while the most interesting matter is overlooked, trifling business and points of no importance are brought forward with all possible observation:—a motion for judgment as against the casual ejector, which is a motion of course—a motion to refer a bill to the master to compute principal and interest—for judgment, as in case of a nonsuit—and a thousand others, either of course or of the most trifling moment, are heard, with the utmost publicity, before the whole court—before the whole bar—before the whole body of attorneys—before the whole public—all of which might be settled by the three judges in a corner, or by any one of them, or by any one of their clerks. The consequence is, that much time is lost to the full court, while the most important business—special arguments, raising the greatest legal questions—new trials, involving both matters of law and fact affecting large interests;—and the crown-paper, comprehending all the questions from sessions, are obliged to be heard in the private and unsatisfactory manner I have described. I wish this system to be remedied, because it is a great and growing evil. . . . .
3. I now pass to the civil law courts; and their constitution I touch with a tender, and, I may say, a trembling hand, knowing that, from my little experience of their practice, I am scarcely competent to discourse of them; for I profess to speak only from such knowledge as I have obtained incidentally by practising in the two courts of appeal, the High Court of Delegates and the Cockpit, where I have been occasionally associated with the civilians. The observations I have to make on this part of the subject resolve themselves, entirely, into those which I would offer upon the manner in which their judges are appointed and paid. In the first place, I would have them better paid than they are now, a reform to which I would fain hope there may be no serious objection on their part, averse, as I know them, generally, to all change. I think they are underpaid in respect of the most important part of their functions. The judge of the Court of Admiralty, who has the highest situation, or almost the highest, among the judges of the land (for there is none of them who decides upon questions of greater delicacy and moment, in a national view, or involving a larger amount of property)—this great dignitary of the law has 2,500l. a-year salary only. The rest of his income is composed of fees, and these are little or nothing during peace. But then, in time of war, they amount to 7,000l. or 8,000l. per annum. I profess not to like the notion of a functionary, who has so many calls, as the judge of the Admiralty Court, for dealing with the most delicate neutral questions—for drawing up manifestoes and giving opinions on those questions, and advising the crown in matters of public policy bearing on our relations with foreign states;—I like not, I say, the notion of such a personage being subject to the dreadful bias (and here, again, I am speaking on general principles only, and with no personal reference whatever) which he is likely to receive, from the circumstance of his having a salary of 2,500l. per annum only, if a state of peace continue, and between 10,000l. or 11,000l. a-year, if it be succeeded by war. . . . . .
Edition: current; Page: [21]
The other remark, which I have to offer on these courts, I would strongly press upon the consideration of the House; it relates to the mode in which their judges are appointed. Is it a fit thing, I ask, now, when Popery is no longer cherished or even respected, indeed hardly tolerated, among us—that one of its worst practices should remain, the appointment of some of the most eminent judges in the civil law courts by prelates of the church? I except, indeed, the judge of the High Court of Admiralty, because his commission proceeds from the Lord High Admiral; but I speak of all those who preside in the Consistorial Courts—who determine the most grave and delicate questions of spiritual law, marriage and divorce, and may decide on the disposition by will of all the personalty of the kingdom. Is it a fit thing that the judges in these most important matters should be appointed, not by the Crown, not by removable and responsible officers of the Crown—but by the Archbishop of Canterbury and Bishop of London, who are neither removable nor responsible—who are not lawyers—who are not statesmen—who ought to be no politicians—who are, indeed, priests of the highest order, but not, on that account, the most proper persons to appoint judges of the highest order? So it is in the province of York, where the judges are appointed by the archbishop; so in all other consistorial courts, where the judges are appointed by the bishops of the respective dioceses in which they are situated. From their courts an appeal lies, it is true, to the Court of Delegates, in the last resort; but so far from this affording an adequate remedy, it is an additional evil; for I will venture to affirm, that the Delegates is one of the worse-constituted courts which was ever appointed, and that the course of its proceedings forms one of the greatest mockeries of appeal ever conceived by man: and I shall demonstrate this to you in a very few words. The court is thus formed:—You take three judges from the common-law courts, one from each; to these you add some half-dozen civil lawyers, advocates from Doctors’ Commons, who the day before may have been practising in those courts, but who happen not to have been in the particular cause, in respect of which the appeal has been asserted. Now, only see what the consequence of this must be. The civilians forming the majority of the delegates are, of necessity, men who have no practice, or the very youngest of the doctors. So that you absolutely appeal from the three great judges of the civil and maritime courts, from the sentences of Sir William Scott, Sir John Nicholl, and Sir Christopher Robinson—of those learned and experienced men, who are to us the great luminaries of the civil law—the venerated oracles best fitted to guide our path through all the difficulties of that branch of the science, and open to us its dark passages—you appeal from them to judges, the majority of whom must, of necessity, be the advocates the least employed in the courts where those great authorities preside, the most recently admitted to those courts, and the most unqualified to pronounce soundly on their proceedings, if it were decent that they should pronounce at all; for, out of so small a bar, the chances are that the three or four eminent advocates have been employed in the case under appeal. Thus the absurdity is really much the same as if you were to appeal from a solemn and elaborate judgment, Edition: current; Page: [22] pronounced by my Lord Tenterden, Mr. Justice Bayley, Mr. Justice Holroyd, and Mr. Justice Littledale, to the judgment of three young barristers, called but the day before, and three older ones, who never could obtain any practice. . . . . .
4. I next come to speak of the Privy Council; a very important judicature, and of which the members discharge as momentous duties as any of the judges of this country, having to determine not only upon questions of colonial law in plantation cases, but to sit also as judges, in the last resort, of all prize causes. The point, however, to which I more immediately address myself on this head is, that they hear and decide upon all our plantation appeals. They are thus made the supreme judges, in the last resort, over every one of your foreign settlements, whether situated in those immense territories which you possess in the East, where you and a trading company together rule over not less than seventy millions of subjects; or established among those rich and populous islands which stud the Indian Ocean, and form the great Eastern Archipelago; or have their stations in those lands, part lying within the tropics, part stretching towards the pole, peopled by various castes differing widely in habits, still more widely in privileges, great in numbers, abounding in wealth, extremely unsettled in their notions of right, and excessively litigious, as all the children of the New World are supposed to be, both from their physical and political constitution. All this immense jurisdiction over the rights of property and person, over rights political and legal, and over all the questions growing out of such a vast and varied province, is exercised by the Privy Council, unaided and alone. It is obvious that, from the mere distance of those colonies, and the immense variety of matters arising in them, foreign to our habits, and beyond the scope of our knowledge, any judicial tribunal in this country must of necessity be an extremely inadequate court of review. But what adds incredibly to the difficulty is, that hardly any two of the colonies can be named which have the same law; and in the greater number the law is wholly unlike our own. In some settlements it is the Dutch law, in others the Spanish, in others the French, in others the Danish. In our Eastern possessions these variations are, if possible, yet greater: while one territory is swayed by the Mohammedan law, another is ruled by the native or Hindu law; and this again, in some of our possessions, is qualified or superseded by the law of Buddha, the English jurisprudence being confined to the handful of British settlers, and the inhabitants of the three Presidencies. All those laws must come, in their turns, in review, before the necessarily ignorant Privy Councillor, after the learned doctors in each have differed. . . . . .
The Privy Council, which ought to be held more regularly than any other court, sits far less constantly than any, having neither a regular bench nor a regular bar. It only meets on certain extraordinary days—the 30th of January, the Feast of the Purification, some day in May, Midsummer-day, and a few others. I find that, on an average of twelve years, ending 1826, it sat in each year nine days, to dispose of all the appeals from all the British subjects in India; from our own civil Edition: current; Page: [23] courts, to the jurisdiction of which all our subjects are locally amenable, throughout the wide extent of the several Presidencies of Calcutta, Bombay, and Madras; to dispose of all the causes which come up to the three several native courts of last resort, the Sudder Adawluts, from the inferior courts of Zilla and Circuit, comprising all contested suits between the Hindoos, the half-caste people, and the Mahomedan inhabitants. But in the same nine days are to be disposed of all the appeals from Ceylon, the Mauritius, the Cape, and New Holland; from our colonies in the West Indies and in North America; from our settlements in the Mediterranean, and from the islands in the Channel;—nine days’ sittings are deemed sufficient for the decision of the whole. But nine days do not suffice, nor anything like it, for this purpose; and the summary I have in my hand demonstrates it both by what it contains, and by what it does not. It appears that, in all those twelve years taken together, the appeals have amounted to but few in number. I marvel that they are so few—and yet I marvel not; for, in point of fact, you have no adequate tribunal to dispose of them; and the want of such a tribunal is an absolute denial of justice to the subjects of the Crown in those colonies. The total number is only 467; but, including about 50, which came from India, and appear not to have been regularly entered, though they are still undisposed of, there are 517. Of these, 243 only have been disposed of; but only 129 have been heard, for the others were either compromised, from hopelessness owing to the delay which had intervened between the appeal and the sentence, or dismissed for want of prosecution. Consequently, the Privy Council must have heard ten or eleven appeals only by the year, or little more than one in the course of each day’s sitting. Again, of the 129 which were heard and disposed of, no less than 56 were decided against the original sentences; which were altered, and, generally speaking, wholly reversed. Now, 56 out of 129 is a very large proportion, little less than one-half; and clearly shows that the limited number of appeals must have arisen, not from the want of cases where revision was required, but from the apprehension of finding no adequate court of review, or no convenient dispatch of business. And that the sentences in the colonies should oftentimes be found ill-digested, or hasty, or ignorant, can be no matter of astonishment, when we find a bold lieutenant-general lord chancellor in one court, and an enterprising captain president in another; and a worthy major officiating as judge-advocate in a third. In many of these cases, a gallant and unlearned lord chancellor has decided, in the court below, points of the greatest legal nicety; and the judges of appeal, who are to set him right here, are chosen without much more regard to legal aptitude; for you are not to suppose that the business of these nine days upon which they sit is all transacted before lawyers: one lawyer there may be, but the rest are laymen. . . .
5. I now, Sir, come to the administration of law in the country, by justices of peace; and I approach this jurisdiction with fear and trembling, when I reflect on what Mr. Windham was accustomed to say, that he dreaded to talk of the game-laws in a House composed of sportsmen; and so, too, I dread to talk of the quorum in an assembly of Edition: current; Page: [24] magistrates. . . . . . Nevertheless, considering the changes which have been effected in modern times, I cannot help thinking it worth inquiry, whether some amendment might not be made in our justice-of-peace system? The first doubt which strikes me is, if it be fit that they should be appointed as they are, merely by the lords lieutenants of counties, without the interference of the Crown’s responsible ministers. It is true that the lord chancellor issues the commission, but it is the lord lieutenant who designates the persons to be comprehended in it. . . . . On looking at the description of persons who are put into the commission, I am not at all satisfied that the choice is made with competent discretion; and upon this part of the question I may as well declare at once, that I have very great doubts as to the expediency of making clergymen magistrates. This is a course which, whenever it can be done conveniently, I should certainly be glad to see changed, unless in counties where there are very few resident lay proprietors. . . . . . Appointed, then, by irresponsible advisers, and irremovable without a conviction, let us now see what is the authority of men so chosen and so secure. . . . . .
In the first place, they have the privilege of granting or withholding licenses. As we all know, it lies in the breasts of two justices of the peace to give or to refuse this important privilege. It is in their absolute power to give a license to one of the most unfit persons possible; and it is in their power to refuse a license to one of the most fit persons possible. They may continue a license to some person who has had it but a twelvemonth, and who, during that twelvemonth, has made his house a nuisance to the whole neighbourhood; or they may take away a license from a house to which it has been attached for a century, and the enjoyment of which has not only been attended by no evil, but has been productive of great public benefit. And all this, be it observed, they do without even the shadow of control. There is no rule more certain than that a mandamus does not lie to compel justices either to grant or withhold a license. I hardly ever remember moving for one; and I only once recollect a rule being granted,—it was on the motion of my honourable and learned friend, the Solicitor-General. But I know that great astonishment was expressed on the occasion; that every one asked what he could have stated to make the court listen to the application; that all took for granted it would be discharged, as a matter of course; which it accordingly was, in less time than I have taken to relate the circumstance. What other control is there over the conduct of the licensing magistrate? I shall be told that he may be proceeded against, either by a criminal information, or by impeachment. As to the latter, no man of common sense would dream of impeaching a magistrate, any more than he would think now-a-days of impeaching a minister. Then, as to proceeding by criminal information:—In the first place it is necessary, in order even to obtain the rule, to produce affidavits, that the magistrate has been influenced by wilful and corrupt motives: not merely affidavits of belief in those who swear, but of facts proving him guilty of malversation in his office. Then suppose, as not unfrequently happens, a rule obtained on this ex-parte statement; the Edition: current; Page: [25] magistrate answers the charges on oath; he swears last, and may touch many points never anticipated by the other party, consequently not answered; and unless the alleged facts remain, upon the discussion, undeniable, and the guilt to be inferred from them seems as clear as the light of day, the rule is discharged with costs. The difficulty of proving corruption is rendered almost insuperable, because all the magistrate has to do, in order to defend himself from the consequences of granting or withholding a license, is to adopt the short course of saying nothing at the time—of keeping his own counsel—of abstaining from any statement of his reasons. Let him only give no reason for his conduct, and no power on earth can touch him. He may grant a license to a common brothel, or he may refuse a license to one of the most respectable inns on the North road; let him withhold his reasons, and his conduct remains unquestionable; although the real motive by which he is actuated may be, that he is in the habit of using the one house, and that the landlord of the other will not suffer him to use it in the same way. Unless you can show that he has himself stated his motives, or that there are circumstances so strong against him as amount to conviction, you are prevented from even instituting an inquiry on the subject. Thus absolute is the authority of the magistrate with regard to licensing. . . . . .
Nor is the licensing power of the magistracy that in which alone great abuses exist. They prevail wheresoever their authority is exercised; in the commitments for offences against the game-laws; in dealing with petty offences against property; in taking cognizance of little assaults, especially on officers; in summary convictions for non-payment of tithes, and a number of other matters affecting the liberties and property of the subject; and yet, for their conduct in all of these matters, they are not amenable to any superior power, provided, as I have said before, they only keep their own counsel, and abstain from stating the reasons by which they have been actuated, should their motives be evil. There is not a worse constituted tribunal on the face of the earth, not even that of the Turkish cadi, than that at which summary convictions on the game-laws constantly take place; I mean, a bench or a brace of sporting justices. . . . . From their decisions on those points, where their passions are the most likely to mislead them, no appeal in reality lies to a more calm and unprejudiced tribunal; for, unless they set out any matter illegal on the face of the conviction, you remove the record in vain. Equally supreme are they in cases where, sitting in a body at quarter-sessions, they decide upon the most important rights of liberty and property. Let it be remembered that they can sentence to almost unlimited imprisonment, to whipping, to fine, nay, to transportation for seven and fourteen years. I have shuddered to see the way in which these extensive powers are sometimes exercised by a jurisdiction not responsible for its acts. It is said that the magistracy ought not to be responsible, because it is not paid; but we ought not to forget that as gold itself may be bought too dear, so may economy; money may be saved at too high a price. Mark the difference of responsibility between the quarter-sessions and one of the superior courts of the kingdom. In Edition: current; Page: [26] the King’s Bench, the name of the judge who pronounces the judgment is known, and the venerable magistrate stands before the country in his own proper person, always placed at the bar of public opinion. Here it is Lord Tenterden—it is Mr. Justice Bayley, by their names: in the other case, it is merely the quarter-sessions, which, as Swift says, is nobody’s name. The individual magistrates composing it are not thought of; their names are not even published. It is a fluctuating body. If the same individuals always sat in the court, there might be some approach to responsibility. At present there is none; and where there is no responsibility, injustice will occasionally be committed, as long as men are men. It would be some correction of the evil, if the number of magistrates was fixed; if their names were always known in connexion with their acts; and if they were more easily removable on proof of their misconduct. Then comes the question—Is it, after all, gratuitous service? We are told that we cannot visit the magistrates severely, or even watch them very strictly, because they volunteer their duty, and receive no remuneration for their trouble. But although they have no money for it, they may have money’s worth. Cheap justice, Sir, is a very good thing; but costly justice is much better than cheap injustice. If I saw clearly the means by which the magistrates could be paid, and by which, therefore, a more correct discharge of the magisterial duties might be insured, I would certainly prefer paying them in money to allowing them to receive money’s worth by jobs, and other violations of their duty. Not only may the magistrate himself receive compensation in money’s worth; he may receive it in hard money by his servants. The fees of a justice’s clerk amount to a little income, often to many times a man’s wages. I have heard of a reverend justice in the country having a clerk whose emoluments he wished to increase, and therefore he had him appointed surveyor of weights and measures, with a salary of a guinea and a half a-week. This person appointed a deputy, to whom he gave five shillings and sixpence, and who did all the duty. These circumstances came under the consideration of his brother justices; when, after a strenuous opposition, and, among others, on the part of the gentleman who communicates the occurrence in a letter now lying before me, it was decided, not only not to remove the first appointed person, who it was proved was doing nothing, but to swear in the other as his assistant! My friend is not entirely without suspicion that this functionary, having so small a remuneration as five shillings and sixpence a-week, can only have undertaken the duty with a view of increasing it by some understanding with the people whose weights and measures it is his duty to superintend.
The operation of pecuniary motives in matters connected with the magistracy is more extensive than may at first sight appear. There was a Bill introduced by the Right Honourable Gentleman opposite for extending the payment of expenses of witnesses and prosecutors out of the county rates. It is not to be doubted that it has greatly increased the number of commitments, and has been the cause of many persons being brought to trial who ought to have been discharged by the magistrates. The habit of committing, from this and other causes, has grievously Edition: current; Page: [27] increased everywhere of late, and especially of boys. Eighteen hundred and odd, many of them mere children, have been committed in the Warwick district during the last seven years. Nor is this a trifling evil. People do not come out of gaol as they went in. A boy may enter the prison-gate merely as a robber of an orchard; he may come out of it “fit for”—I will not say “treasons”—but certainly “stratagems and spoils.” Many are the inducements, independent of any legislative encouragement, to these commitments. The justice thinks he gains credit by them. He has the glory of being commemorated at the assizes before the lord judge, and the sheriff, and the grand jury, and all who read the Crown Calendar. On that solemn occasion, he has the gratification of hearing it fly from mouth to mouth—“He is a monstrous good magistrate; no man commits so many persons.” Then there is the lesser glory acquired among neighbours; into whose pockets they are the means of putting money, by making them prosecutors and witnesses in petty criminal cases; and thus converting (as Sir Eardley Wilmot says) their journey of duty into a jaunt of pleasure to the assizes. The reputation of activity is very seducing to a magistrate; but I have known it curiously combined with things more solid than empty praise. In a certain town, which I am well acquainted with, one suburb was peopled by Irishmen and Scots, who were wont to fight on every marketday a good deal, at fair tides a good deal more, but without any serious affray taking place. Besides these two classes of the king’s subjects, there also dwelt in those parts two justices of the king, assigned to keep the peace; for the better conserving of which they repaired at the hour of fight to an alehouse, conveniently situated hard by the scene of action, and there took their seat with a punch-bowl full of warrants, ready to fill up. If the Irish happened to be victorious, the Scots came one after another and applied for commitments against those who had assaulted them. The dispatch with which warrants, at least, if not justice, were administered, was notable. Then came the other party, and swore to as many assaults upon them; and justice being even-handed, they, too, had their desire gratified; until the bowl was, by degrees, emptied of its paper investment, and a metallic currency, by like degrees, took its place.
Some of these details may be ludicrous; but the general subject is a most serious and a most important one, because these facts show the manner in which justice is administered to the people out of sight of the public, and out of reach of the higher courts of law. It is through the magistracy, more than through any other agency—except, indeed, that of the tax-gatherer—that the people are brought directly into contact with the government of the country; and this is the measure of justice with which, when they approach it, they are treated by functionaries irresponsible for their proceedings. A justice of the peace, whether in his own parlour or on the bench—whether employed in summary convictions, or in enforcing what is called, after a very worthy friend of mine, Mr. Nicholson Calvert’s Act (one of the worst in the statute-book, which I hope to see repealed, and which I trust its excellent author will very long survive)—is never an ostensible individual, responsible Edition: current; Page: [28] in his own proper person to public opinion; hardly ever, unless he chooses by some indiscretion to make himself so, amenable to a higher and purer judicature.’*

This does not profess to be a complete enumeration of our courts, nor shall we pretend to fill it up. We shall only mention such names as are familiar to all, and occur to us at the moment. In the first place, there is the great class of courts—the courts of equity, which, in respect to the mass of property they dispose of, are the most important of all—including the Chancellor’s Court, the Vice-Chancellor’s, the Rolls Court, the courts of the masters in chancery, the commissioners in equity, and, for aught we know, more. Then we have our small-debt courts of all descriptions, courts of requests, courts of conscience; also county courts, barons’ courts, courts leet, several provincial courts of the Bishopric of Durham, the Duchy of Lancaster, &c.; coroners’ inquests, grand juries, and more, if we could recollect them.
It is perfectly certain that, with such a confused supply of instruments, the business of judicature must be wretchedly performed; and the phenomenon is the more hideous, when it is discovered that the mode of supplying the proper instruments is so perfectly simple, and the reason of the case so clear and irresistible.—England has been blessed with a legislature. Nothing which required amendment ever escaped its clear and virtuous intelligence.
In this jumble of courts—one intrusted with one fraction of the business of judicature, another with another, according to no plan or system, there is one peculiarity, unknown to any law but the English,—we mean, the courts set apart for that which is called equity. This word equity has propagated an erroneous notion with respect to these courts, as if it was their business to relax the strictness of law, and supersede its provisions, when the operation of them appeared to bear hard upon one of the parties. If this were true, courts of equity would be a still greater monster in judicature than they are.
So exceedingly imperfect in their original structure were the courts of law, that, in many cases, and those of the highest importance, they were altogether incompetent to the business. A remedy was found, by chance more than design. A high officer of the king took upon him, cautiously at first, and in select cases, to yield the remedy which was so much required. The abuse (for such it was) being found convenient, was allowed to go on; and grew, by degrees, into the established system which we now behold, of judicature for the principal part of the Edition: current; Page: [29] property of the country. This mode of legislating was agreeable to the imbecility of the age. What grew up of its own accord saved all expense of thought, which was not very plentiful or the exercise of it very agreeable. And the institutions of government grew, as Sir James Mackintosh thinks they ought to do, like trees, by a sort of vegetative process; reason, according to this hypothesis, being a second-rate guide in the affairs of men; foresight, plan, combination, pregnant with delusion and miscarriage. Our law tree has certainly grown to a notable bulk, whatever the quality of its timber.
Reason, certainly, in this matter, had it been applied to, would have taken a different course from the one pursued; it would have corrected the defects in the courts of law, which unfitted them for the administration of justice, in a certain important class of cases; and would thus have secured the all-important ends of law, by placing it in the same hands in all its departments, instead of resorting to the wretched makeshift of letting a new set of hands take up what it wanted only a salutary alteration to enable the old to perform.
Lord Erskine describes the jurisdiction of the Court of Chancery in the following words:—

‘The jurisdiction of this high court, according to the great authority above alluded to, became necessary—

1. When the principles of the law by which the ordinary courts were guided gave a right, but where their powers (for the reasons I have adverted to) were not sufficient to afford a complete remedy.
2. Where the courts of ordinary jurisdiction were made instruments of injustice.
3. Where they gave no right, but where, upon the principles of universal justice, the interference of the judicial power became necessary to prevent a wrong, when positive law was silent.
4. To remove impediments to the fair decision of a question in other courts.
5. To provide for the safety of property in dispute, pending a litigation in the ordinary courts.
6. To prevent the assertion of doubtful rights in a manner which might be productive of irreparable injury.
7. To prevent injury to a third person by the doubtful title of others.
8. To put a bound to vexatious and oppressive litigation.
9. To compel a discovery, which was beyond the customary powers of other courts.
10. To preserve testimony.’


—Armata, Part II. p. 147.


There is only one thing more, on which we think it necessary at present to remark, in regard to our judicial establishment. How defective soever it is in all other respects, it is by far the most defective in regard to that on which the efficiency of the Edition: current; Page: [30] whole depends—the business of appeal. Of the badness of our arrangements for the indispensable security of appeal, we are not qualified to speak in detail, nor is it necessary. That the means are ill adapted to the end is notorious; and that to a degree disgraceful to the Legislature—which looks on such a grievance with indifference, and to the people who endure the apathy of such a Legislature.
A great part of the judicial business done in England is altogether without the benefit of appeal; and to that extent the people are deprived of the best security for good judicature. We have seen what Lord Brougham has said on the absence of all remedy for the misconduct of justices of the peace. And when we consider that theirs is the jurisdiction which mostly concerns the great mass of the people, and that it is left in this state to the present hour, it reads a lesson on the nature of aristocratic government. This is a specimen of disregard of the interests of the mass of the people, continued from generation to generation, which is not exceeded by anything recorded of the most barbarous governments which have at any time been the scourge of any portion of the human race.
The provision for appeal from the decisions of the courts of common law is so extremely defective, that the benefit of it is really very little known. The defects, in the way of evidence, of the original tribunals, are remedied by a new trial, that is, with great expense, and still without appeal. Difficult questions of law are referred to more judges than one, and there is a writ of error to the House of Lords. But this is far from coming up to the idea of a regular appeal to a set of judges, regularly set apart for the business of appeal, revising the whole proceedings, and having this for their exclusive duty.—N.B. Nothing is of more importance in judicature, than to keep the business of original and that of appellate jurisdiction perfectly distinct. The judge in original jurisdiction should not have mixed with that jurisdiction the business of jurisdiction in appeal. They are distinct functions, which are never well performed when they are jumbled together. This is a first principle in jurisprudence.
The only real court of appeal we have upon this principle, in England, is the House of Lords. We shall not think of explaining the utter unfitness of that court, as hitherto constituted, to be a court of appeal, for there is but one opinion on the subject. And we have only to add, that the business of appeal is as ill provided for, in the case of the equity courts, as in that of the courts of common law. The Chancellor, who is a judge of original jurisdiction, and thereby unfitted to be a judge in Edition: current; Page: [31] appeal, receives appeals from the inferior equity courts; and another appeal lies from him to the House of Lords, where again he is substantially the judge. This, then, is a second stage of appeal, with all its burthen of expense, which is only an appeal from the same to the same. This looks like the sport with human happiness of some malignant demon, rather than the deliberate arrangements of human reason for human good.
After having seen what judges are required for the best administration of law, we come to inquire by what proceedings the business they are called upon to accomplish may best be performed. This is the third and last of the topics which require the attention of the law reformer. The rectification of the text of the law, the best mode of allotting the services of the judges, and the best mode of judicial operation,—these things sufficiently provided for, complete the arrangements for the best administration of justice.
We shall proceed in the illustration of this last topic in the same manner as we have done in the two preceding. We shall, in the first place, show how simply and easily common sense arrives at the expedients which are best adapted to the end in view. And then we shall adduce some evidence, to show how widely English law has departed from the proper proceedings, and how great the necessity is of a speedy and thorough reform.
It is evident, when a judge is called upon to determine which of two litigant parties is in the right, his inquiry divides itself into two stages. The first thing he has to determine is—what is the point on which the question of right hinges. That is sometimes a point of law, but most frequently it is a point of fact. Some matter of fact, affirmed on the one side, denied on the other, is that which determines, according as it is established by evidence, or not, to which of the two litigants the right to the object in dispute belongs.
This is a doctrine acted upon by English law; and so far it is distinguished to its advantage from other systems of law, in almost all of which this most important object is entirely neglected. In almost all other systems of law, the parties, in bringing forward their respective cases, are allowed to heap together whatever appears to them to improve their chance of a favourable decision,—matters secondary as well as primary,—collateral as well as direct,—irrelevant as well as those to the purpose; and even evidence, as well as the matters which are to be proved.
English law has seen, that the first business of the judge, on receiving the mass of heterogeneous matter which parties are Edition: current; Page: [32] prone to urge upon him, is—to disentangle the mass—to strip from it everything which is superfluous and irrelevant, and fix upon that which he perceives to involve the essence of the dispute.
Reason, at the first inspection, sees the necessity of this procedure to a clear understanding and satisfactory solution of the question involved in the allegations of the parties. Unless the judge is contented to decide in the midst of confusion, he must make this separation for himself sooner or later; and the advantage, as we shall afterwards see, is immense of making it at the beginning. English law has been so fully sensible of the importance of it, that it has provided a process for the purpose. It has what it calls pleadings, the object of which is to elicit what it calls the issue,—that is, some point affirmed on the one side, denied on the other, on which the question of right depends.
If anything, in the whole process of the judicial inquiry, be a business for the mind of the judge, this is. On the right or wrong determination of the point on which the decision is to turn, the decision itself is likely to be right or wrong. This is of too much importance to be intrusted to anybody but the judge. Let us see, then, what common sense may recommend to us as the course which it is best for him to adopt in proceeding to this determination.
It is clear, first of all, that he must have information. The parties must state their case to him. The question is, should this be done by writing, or in person? A moment’s reflection is surely sufficient to determine that question. A writing can answer no questions. A writing is very apt to be defective. If the party himself is present, not a moment’s time is lost. Whatever information is necessary to illuminate the mind of the judge, a question from the judge produces immediately; and he never ceases putting question after question till he is satisfied that he has the whole case before him. This is what is called vivâ voce pleading; and its superiority to any mode of pleading by writing is too evident to need any further illustration. The simplicity and efficiency of the procedure becomes obvious at once. The plaintiff makes application to the judge, according to some convenient and established form. Admitted to the presence of the judge, he states his claim, and indicates the party against whom it is brought. The questions of the judge then commence. Your claim being as you say, on what is it grounded? It may happen that the ground on which the plaintiff lays his claim will not sustain it. The judge declares so, and the suit is terminated. There is no occasion to Edition: current; Page: [33] give the party against whom it is brought the trouble of a single attendance. This, however, is not the common case. The plaintiff commonly adduces something which, if not rebutted, would establish his claim. In that case, it is necessary that the defendant should be summoned, to answer to the claim. Both parties appear in the presence of the judge. The defendant is told what the claim is against him, and what the ground alleged by the plaintiff. Let us suppose the commonest case—an allegation of debt. Let us suppose, also, the ground of claim which is brought by the plaintiff to be—sale of a horse. He says the defendant bought of him a horse for 20l., but has never paid him. The defendant is then asked what he has to say to this ground of claim; and he may deny the fact. He may deny that he ever bought a horse of the plaintiff. The issue, in that case, is found immediately. Here is a fact, affirmed on the one side, denied on the other, which decides the question in dispute. After this, there only remains the evidence of the fact, the process for taking which is called the trial, and constitutes the second part of the judicial investigation. The defendant, however, may not perhaps deny the fact of having purchased the horse, but may affirm that he paid for him. In that case there is another issue: namely, whether he paid for him or not.
Sometimes the allegations are very complicated; and it is only after a long series of questions that the point which really determines the question is elicited.
Not only is this mode of determining the issue, or what the point is on which the whole question hinges, of the importance which we have seen it is for clearing the way of the judge,—it is of vast importance in many other respects. Persons who have made choice of this mode of proceeding—of whom we have various instances among the servants of the Indian government—declare that its efficacy is most surprising in abridging litigation; that in nine instances out of ten the question of right, through the interrogations of the judge, and the admissions of the parties, becomes apparent, at the first hearing of the case, to the parties themselves; and the judge at once pronounces his decision. The courts of law in this manner operate as conciliation courts: this mode of pleading naturally makes them such, and with infinite advantages above all other conciliation courts, because there is here full and complete knowledge of the cause by him who best knows the use to be made of it.
To what a degree the mode of pleading in English law departs from this rational course, we shall presently produce the testimony of English lawyers themselves to establish. First of Edition: current; Page: [34] all, it is in writing, and therefore deprived of all the inestimable advantages of vivâ voce examination. Next, this important part of the judicial inquiry is not performed by the judge at all. It is performed by the parties themselves, and their legal advisers, according to the following process:—A paper is prepared on the part of the plaintiff: this is lodged in a certain office: another paper is prepared on the part of the defendant, and that also is lodged in an office. Those papers and counter-papers may go on to a considerable number. All this while the elucidation of the truth is not the object which is aimed at by any of the parties concerned in this strange correspondence. The object of each of the parties is to obscure it, as far as it is not in his favour, to the utmost possible degree. The proceedings are never submitted to the judge: they are all finished without his being made acquainted with the matter. The correspondence is seen by him, for the first time, when the issue is brought before him for trial,—that is, when the matter-of-fact, on which the question of right depends, as settled, through this marvellous kind of intercourse, by the parties themselves, is to be determined by evidence.
How unlike this is to a rational proceeding, we shall not stay to enforce. It suffices to say, that in practice it led into such a tissue of intricacies and subtleties, that it was at last discovered to be more injurious than useful to the cause of justice, and has been to a great degree discarded by the courts themselves. But what have the courts done to supply its place? Nothing at all. They allow what they call the general issue to be pleaded: in other words, they allow the defendant to deny, in the most general terms, the justice of the plaintiff’s claim, or accusation: and in all such cases dispense with the process of pleading: cut off as useless the first essential part of the judicial inquiry—that which determines the point whereon the question of right depends. The cause comes on for trial, that is for the hearing of evidence, without its being known what it is for which evidence is required. Lawyers make speeches on one side; lawyers make speeches on the other side; and the judge gathers up, the best way he can, by this extempore process, the point or points in which the merits of the case are involved. Often he does not gather it up at all; and the whole proceeding is a mass of confusion. Evidence is taken on many points, which it is altogether useless to settle; very often the decision is made to turn on the wrong point. And one great evil is constant. Whereas the parties, when the issue is settled beforehand, are called upon to produce witnesses only to the point which decides the question, they are Edition: current; Page: [35] put to the expense, in this mode of procedure, of having witnesses ready to prove every point on which, by conjecture, the decision may possibly turn.
The following picture by Lord Brougham is of so much importance, that we cannot forbear inserting it, though it occupies a greater than the convenient space:—

‘We are now to suppose the parties in court, and called upon to state their cases, the claim of one and defence of the other. Anciently, this pleading, as it is termed, was by word of mouth; but in more modern times it has been carried on in writing. Originally, too, pleas were in French; afterwards in Latin; and, for a century past, by a great, but most salutary innovation, doubtless much reviled and dreaded in its day, they have been conducted in English. . . . . Lord Coke deemed special pleading so delightful a science, that its very name was derived, according to him, from its pleasurable nature—“Quia bene placitare omnibus placet.” Incapable of inventing a new pleasure, I would fain restore a lost one, by bringing back pleading to somewhat of its pristine state, when it gave our ancestors such exquisite recreation. Certain it is that our deviation from the old rules in this branch of the law has been attended with evil effects. Those rules, as Lord Mansfield once said, were founded in reason and good sense; accuracy and justice was their object, and in the details much of ingenuity and subtlety were displayed. But by degrees the good sense has disappeared, and the ingenuity and subtlety have increased beyond measure, and been oftentimes misdirected: nay, to such a pitch have the changes proceeded, that at last subtlety has superseded sense—accuracy and justice are well nigh lost sight of; and ingenuity is exhausted in devising pretexts for prolixity and means of stratagem. In these really hurtful innovations, the courts of law have been the far too ready accomplices; and the legislature has been a most willing instrument to increase the evil, by sanctioning, almost as a matter of course, in each new act, the power of pleading the general issue. . . . .
I regret to say, that the last century and a half has witnessed great and prejudicial alterations in the original plan: so that the record, in the great majority of cases, instead of exhibiting a plain view of what each party is prepared to prove, contains an endless multitude of words, from which, if the real matter in dispute can be gathered at all, it is only by guess work, or by communications out of the record, relating to things of which it gives not even a hint. Let us look into this a little more narrowly. The count of a declaration should convey information as to the subject of the action; but it conveys no precise knowledge of the plaintiff’s demand, or indeed of what the suit is about. Take the instance of the Common Counts, as they are justly termed, in Assumpsit, being those constantly resorted to, and take the most common of these, the count for money had and received. I will take no advantage of the audience I speak before being unacquainted with legal niceties, in order to make merry with the venerable formalities of the art. All lawyers know how easy it would be in this place to raise a smile, at the least, by recounting Edition: current; Page: [36] the little fooleries of our draftsmen; but I disdain it, and will treat the subject precisely as if I were addressing professional men. The plaintiff declares that the defendant, being indebted to him for so much money had and received to the use of the said plaintiff, to wit, one thousand pounds, undertook and faithfully promised to pay it, but broke his engagement; and the count is thus framed, the self-same terms being invariably used, whatever be the cause of action which can be brought into court under this head. Now, observe how various the matters are which may be all described by the foregoing words. In the first place, such is the declaration for money paid by one individual to another, for the use and benefit of the plaintiff; this is what alone the words of the count imply, but to express this they are rarely indeed made use of. Secondly, the self-same terms are used on suing for money received on a consideration that fails, and used in the same way to describe all the endless variety of cases which can occur of such failure, as an estate sold with a bad title, and a deposit paid,—a horse sold with a concealed unsoundness, and so forth; thirdly, the same words are used when it is wished to recover money paid under mistake of fact; fourthly, to recover money paid by one person to a stakeholder, in consideration of an illegal contract made with another person; fifthly, money paid to revenue officers for releasing the goods illegally detained, of the person paying; sixthly, to try the right to any office, instead of bringing an assize; seventhly, to try the liability of the landlord for rates levied on his tenant. What information, then, does such a declaration give? It is impossible, on reading this count, to say which of the seven causes of action has arisen; and it is not merely those seven, for each one of them has a vast number of varieties, which are declared on in the same words. In actions of Trover the case is even worse. Suppose the case of a plaintiff suing for any chattel, as a gun, the declaration will be such as may apply equally to at least eight different heads, under each of which are many different causes of action. The words in all would be the very same—that the plaintiff was possessed of a gun, as of his own proper goods and chattels; that he accidentally lost it; that the defendant found it, and converted it to his use. Now this count describes only one case—that of a gun lost by its owner, and detained by the finder. But it is employed to mean, secondly, that the gun has been taken by the defendant, under pretence of some title, or in any way not felonious; thirdly, that it was deposited with the defendant, who refused to deliver it up; fourthly, that it was stopped in transitu, the price not having been paid; fifthly, that the plaintiff is the assignce of a bankrupt, and seeks to recover the gun, as having been sold after the bankruptcy of the vendor; sixthly, that the plaintiff has been improperly made a bankrupt, and sues the assignees to try the bankruptcy; seventhly, that his goods have been unlawfully taken, and he sues to try the validity of an execution, on any of the various grounds of fraud, &c., which impeach the validity of the process; eightly, that the gun has been misdelivered, or detained, by a warehouseman or carrier. All those causes of action differ from each other as much as different things can differ, and yet they are all stated in the declaration in the same way, and signified under the same form of words.
Edition: current; Page: [37]
The pleadings in cases where it might be expected that the greatest particularity would be given to the statement, actions upon torts to the person, are somewhat, but for the most part, not remarkably more definite and precise in their description. The declarations on the seduction of a wife, servant, or daughter, assault, and false imprisonment, are drawn so that you can say, no doubt, what the action is about, which you hardly ever can in cases of assumpsit or trover; but the same form of words is used, whatever the particular shape of the cause may be. Of the circumstances peculiar to the transaction, the pleadings tell the defendant nothing—they tell the counsel nothing—they tell the judge nothing. It may be said that the defendant must know the cause of action himself; but that does not always follow, especially if (which may be presumed barely possible, though it seems never to be thought so) the allegations are groundless. There is, however, one person who must know the cause of action, and that is the plaintiff. He ought, for the satisfaction of all concerned, to state it distinctly. The same may be said of the counts in trespass for taking goods. In trespass quare clausum fregit, perhaps, the description of the wrong done is more specific. But it happens that the circumstances here are of far less importance; damages are not in question; a shilling or so is to be recovered, the object of the action being almost always to try a right of property or an easement. In all other cases of trespass, where a knowledge of the wrong suffered is most material, the parties are left to fight, and the court to decide, in the dark; but in the case I have just alluded to, where a knowledge of the circumstances in which the trespass was committed is immaterial, everything is told them of which it is wholly unimportant that they should be informed; in a cumbrous way, no doubt, and with much fanciful statement, but still it is told. Actions for slaunder and libel, for malicious prosecutions, and malicious arrest, or holding to bail, with others on the case, are very particular, and form, certainly, an exception to the ordinary course of pleading; at least, as far as the declaration goes; no farther, as we shall presently see—for I now proceed to the next stage of the pleadings, namely, to the pleas which the defendant puts upon the record in answer to the plaintiff’s complaints.
In this stage of the cause we encounter the same evils, but in greater abundance; for they affect those actions on the case where the count is most precise. Generally speaking, it may be said that, if the plaintiff tells us nothing in his declaration, the defendant, in return, tells us as little in his plea; in that respect, at least, they are even. This is, perhaps, a consequence of the former evil; but, be that as it may, it ought to be remedied. The plaintiff ought to tell the defendant the real nature of his complaint, and the defendant ought to make him equally acquainted with the nature of his answer. If this were always done, perjury would not so often be committed; everything intended to be proved would be stated on each side; and the parties, knowing the evidence on which the respective statements must be established, would have an opportunity of examining into the character of the witnesses, and of procuring the best evidence to elucidate the point. At present, the mystery of pleading leaves them in doubt; and the vague and indistinct Edition: current; Page: [38] statements on the record, unaccompanied by other information, open a door to the entrance of falsehood in the witnesses, far wider than any you could open, by enabling them to get up proofs in answer to those expected from the opposite side. Whenever the parties fight each other by trick, on the record in the first instance, fencing to evade telling their grounds of contention, they renew the fight afterwards by perjury in court. I will now give the House some instances of the vagueness of this part of pleading.
In the indebitatus assumpsit, from which I took my first example, the general issue is non assumpsit. Now, under that plea, no less than eight different defences may be set up; as, for instance, a denial of the contract, payment, usury, gaming, infancy, coverture, accord and satisfaction, release. All these defences are entirely different, and yet they are all stated in the self-same words. So, too, in the action of trover; take our former case of the gun: the defendant, under the plea of “not guilty,” may set up as a defence that he is a gamekeeper, and took it by virtue of the statute of Charles II.; or that he had a lien upon it as a carrier for his general balance, and had, therefore, a right to detain it; or a particular lien for work done upon it; or that he had received it as a deposit, and was entitled to keep it; or that he had took it for toll, or detained it till passage money due by its owner were paid; or the reward due for saving it from shipwreck were given. Any one of these defences may be concealed under the plea of “not guilty,” without the possibility of the plaintiff discovering which it is that his adversary means to set up; so that every body will, I think, agree with me, that if the count teaches the court and opposite party little, the plea teaches them not a whit more.
2. The inconsistency of many of our rules of pleading forms the next head of complaint to which I shall direct your attention; and it is just as manifest as the vagueness and indistinctness I have been pointing out. Why are infancy and coverture to be given in evidence under the general issue, while other defences of a similar description must be pleaded specially, as the statute of limitations always, and leave and license in trespass? If it is right that specific defences, of which your general plea gives your opponent no notice, should be couched under that plea, why should you be compelled to give notice of other averments before being suffered to prove them? Why do you, in one case, multiply pleas, which, in the other, your own practice declares to be unnecessary? One or other course, the vague or the definite, the prolix or the concise, may be fitting: both cannot be right. Nay, there is often an option given as to the same thing; infancy, coverture, release, accord, and satisfaction, and others, may either be given under the general issue in assumpsit, or pleaded. Why, this choice amounts to no rule at all! If a ground of defence is ever to be pleaded specially, why not always?
3. Akin to this inconsistency of principle is the variety of repugnant counts and pleas allowed in all cases whatever. Where there are ten different ways of stating a defence, and all of them are employed, it is hardly possible that any three of them can be true; at the same time Edition: current; Page: [39] their variety tends to prevent both the opposite party and the court from knowing the real question to be tried. Yet this practice is generally resorted to, because neither party knows accurately what course his opponent may take; each, therefore, throws his drag-net over the whole ground, in hopes to avail himself of every thing which cannot escape through its meshes. Take the case of debt on bond. The first plea in such an action, almost as a matter of course, is the general issue, non est factum, whereby the defendant denies that it is his deed; the second as usual is, solvit ad diem—he paid it on the day mentioned in the bond, a circumstance not very likely to happen, if it be not his deed; the third is solvit post diem—he paid it after the day; a thing equally unlikely to happen, if it be not his bond, or if he paid it when due; and a fourth often is, a general release. What can the plaintiff learn from a statement in which the defendant first asserts that he never executed the deed, and next that he not only executed it, but has moreover paid it off? Where pleas are consistent with each other, it may be well to let them be pleaded in unlimited abundance: where they are not only not consistent, but absolutely destructive of each other, it would be a good rule to establish that such pleas should not be put together upon the record, at least without some previous discussion and leave obtained. The grounds of action are often stated with almost as great inconsistency, almost always with greater multiplicity in the declaration. I recollect that at York, many years ago, it was my duty, as junior counsel, to open the pleadings in an action brought upon a wager which had been laid upon the life of the Emperor Napoleon. I stated to the jury in the usual way that the defendant, in consideration of one hundred guineas, agreed to pay the plaintiff a guinea a day during the life of one Napoleon Bonaparte, and so forth, alleging the breach. Thus far all was well, and the audience were not disturbed; but there was not much gravity among them when I went on to state the second count, averring another wager on the life of “one other Napoleon Bonaparte;” and indeed, though one in those days was quite enough for the rest of the world, two did not satisfy the pleader, who made mention of a third and a fourth Napoleon.’*

We give the following as evidence from the Second Report of Commissioners on Courts of Common Law:—

‘The multiplication of counts and pleas has long been considered as one of the chief abuses in the system of pleading. Though in other respects the prolixity of allegation once prevalent has been materially retrenched, this particular kind of redundance has never, perhaps, prevailed more remarkably than at the present day. Records, containing from ten to fifteen special counts or pleas, are by no means rare, and fail to excite remark. Of these, the greater proportion, and frequently the whole, relate to the same substantial cause of action or defence. They are merely different expositions of the same case, and expositions of it often inconsistent with each other. The practice is productive of great and various inconveniences. One of the most obvious is its tendency Edition: current; Page: [40] to increase the expense of litigation. The length of a count or plea is very uncertain, but cannot be stated on an average at less than four law folios, and at that length, the addition of each count or plea is an addition of four shillings to the taxed costs on the draft. The increased expense is also to be taken into the account which attends the making copies to be kept and sent into the country, the making up of the issue, the paper books, the engrossments on parchment, and court fees thereon, and the necessary increase in the length of the brief and the amount of fees to counsel. There are other consequences, however, of the practice, even more injurious in our opinion, than its effects on the bill of costs. It often leads to such bulky and intricate combinations of statement, as to present the case to the judge and jury in a form of considerable complexity; and is apt, therefore, to embarrass and protract the trial, and occasionally leads to ultimate confusion and mistake in the administration of justice. The inconvenience last mentioned is more particularly felt, when, to a declaration consisting of various counts, the pleading happens to be special; for in that case the pleas also, like the counts to which they are pleaded, are often framed in various forms, and the intricacy of the whole record proportionably increased. The practice, therefore, of multiplying counts and pleas presents one of the greatest obstacles to a more extended use of special pleading—a system, the great advantage of which we shall have occasion, in the course of this report, to explain and enforce.
The practice in question appears at first sight no less strange than objectionable. To allow the plaintiff or defendant to state his case in ten or fifteen different ways, more especially if the statements be inconsistent, is a custom, the reasonableness of which is not readily perceived, which is peculiar perhaps to our own system of judicature, and which seems to have been unknown even in that system at a former period. With respect to pleas, indeed, it is certain that the practice is not older than the 4 Anne, c. 16; and though it has been of much longer duration with respect to counts, yet the precedents from the time of Queen Elizabeth to that of King William and Queen Mary, show, that, in the use of several counts, the pleader was at that period incomparably more sparing than at present; and the still existing rule which requires each count always to set forth a cause of action ostensibly different from the preceding (even when in fact the same) combines with other reasons in support of the opinion that at an antecedent era one count only upon each cause of action was allowed. The present variety of statement, however, is not without sufficient motive, nor is its abolition or reform a task without difficulty. In some degree that variety may, no doubt, be attributed to the increased remuneration which the pleader or attorney obtains by lengthening the draft. But it is mainly founded on reasons of a more honest and more cogent kind. The principal of these is the state of the law on the subject of variance.
At the trial of the cause, a material variance between the allegation in the pleading, and the state of facts proved, is a fatal objection, and decides the suit in favour of the objecting party; and a variance is often considered in this technical sense as material, though to common Edition: current; Page: [41] sense it may appear to be very trifling, and though it may be wholly irrelevant to the merits of the case.
Thus, in an action for a false charge of felony, (Waller v. Mace, 2 Barn. and Ald., 756,) where the declaration stated that the defendant went before Richard Cavendish, Baron Waterpark of Waterfork, a justice of the peace, and falsely charged the plaintiff with the felony, and it appeared in evidence that the charge was made before Richard Cavendish, Baron Waterpark of Waterpark, this variance was considered as fatal, and the plaintiff was nonsuited. So in a case (Jones v. Cowley, 4 Barn. and Cress., 445) where the plaintiff brought his action on the warranty of a horse, stating the warranty to be that the horse was sound, and it appeared upon the proof that the warranty was that the horse was sound except for a kick on one of its legs, this was also held to be a ground of nonsuit, though the unsoundness which was proved, and for which the action was brought, had no relation to the leg. In another case (Shipham v. Samders, 2 East, 4) where the plaintiff brought his action on a contract to deliver goods, though he took the precaution of stating it in two different ways, viz., in one count, as a contract to deliver within fourteen days, and, in another, as a contract to deliver on the arrival of a certain ship; yet he was nonsuited, because at the trial it was proved to be a contract in the alternative, viz., to deliver within fourteen days, or on the arrival of the ship; and he had no count stating it in the alternative. The cause of action, however, was the non-delivery of the goods after the expiration of the fourteen days, and also after the arrival of the vessel, so that the variance was wholly immaterial to the real merits of the case. This kind of objection is naturally looked out for by a party whose case has no foundation on the merits, and is consequently of very frequent occurrence; so that, notwithstanding the protection from it, afforded (as will presently be explained) by the use of several counts and pleas, it is one of the most frequent sources of miscarriage in the suit.’*

The following quotation, from the same authority, relates to the mode of pleading by the general issue:—

‘One of the most important questions which has presented itself in the course of our inquiries, is, whether it is expedient to continue to any, and to what extent, the use of that kind of plea denominated the General Issue. Under this plea, which is in its shape a summary form of denial of the allegations in the declaration, or some principal part of them, a defendant is at present allowed, in certain actions, to put the plaintiff to the proof of everything alleged in the declaration, and in some, not only to do this, but at the same time to prove in his own defence, almost any kind of matter in confession and avoidance; that is, matter which, admitting the truth of the plaintiff’s allegations, tends to repel or obviate their effect. On the other hand, there are some kinds of action in which, if the defence consists of any matter in confession and avoidance, it must be specially pleaded, and cannot be admitted in proof under the general Edition: current; Page: [42] issue; and there are others in which, properly speaking, there is no general issue, and in which all the pleading may be considered as special.
That the present state of the practice on this subject requires alteration seems to be universally felt; but with respect to the kind of alteration required, the views taken by different persons are surprisingly dissimilar; one set of opinions pointing to the restriction of the general issue, and another to its wider application, and to a correspondent extinguishment of special pleading. It will be found, however, on reference to the written communications addressed to us, that there is a decided preponderance of authority in favour of the former course; and we do not hesitate to declare our own strong conviction that it is the right one, and that its adoption would be attended with highly beneficial results.
We conceive that considerable misapprehension popularly prevails upon the subject of special pleading. That system was characterised, no doubt, at former periods of our legal history, by a tendency to prolix and tautologous allegation, an excessive subtlety, and an overstrained observance of form; and, notwithstanding material modern improvements, it still exhibits too much of the same qualities. These, its disadvantages, are prominent and well understood; its recommendations are, perhaps, less obvious, but, when explained, cannot fail to be recognized as of far superior weight. Special pleading, considered in its principle, is a valuable forensic invention peculiar to the common law of England, by the effect of which, the precise point in controversy between the parties is developed, and presented in a shape fit for decision. If that point is found to consist of matter of fact, the parties are thus apprised of the exact nature of the question to be decided by the jury, and are enabled to prepare their proofs with proportionate precision. If, on the other hand, it turns out to be matter of law, they have the means of immediately obtaining the decision of the cause, without the expense and trouble of a trial—by demurrer,—that is, by referring the legal question, so evolved, to the determination of the judges.
But where, instead of special pleading, the general issue is used, and, under it, the defendant is allowed to bring forward matters in confession and avoidance, these benefits are lost. Consisting, as that plea does, of a mere summary denial of the case stated by the plaintiff, and giving no notice of any defensive allegation on which the defendant means to rely, it sends the whole case on either side to trial, without distinguishing the fact from the law, and without defining the exact question or questions of fact to be tried. It not unfrequently, therefore, happens, that the parties are taken by surprise, and find themselves opposed by some unexpected matters of defence or reply, which, from the want of timely notice, they are not in due condition to resist.
But an effect of more common, and indeed almost invariable occurrence, is the unnecessary accumulation of proof, and consequently of expense; for as nothing is admitted upon the pleadings, each party is obliged to prepare himself, as far as it is practicable, with evidence upon all the different points which the nature of the action can by possibility Edition: current; Page: [43] make it incumbent upon him to establish, though many of them may turn out to be undisputed, and many of them may be such as his adversary, if compelled to plead specially, would have thought it undesirable to dispute.
With respect to matters of law, the inconvenience experienced, though of a different kind, is not less remarkable; for when points of law arise upon the general issue, instead of being developed, by way of demurrer, for adjudication by the full court in banc, they are of necessity left to the decision of the single judge before whom the cause is tried; and their decision, upon his sole authority, deprived as he generally is of the advantage of any previous intimation of the matters to be argued, and unable to refer to books, is often found to be unsatisfactory and inconclusive. It may even happen (and that is not an unfrequent occurrence) that the controversy, under this form of plea, turns entirely upon matter of law, there being no fact really in dispute; and, in that case, the mode of decision by jury is not only defective but misplaced, and the trial might have been spared altogether, if the parties had proceeded by the way of special pleading, and raised the question upon demurrer.
Another ill consequence attendant upon the general issue is, that as the true point for decision has not been evolved in the pleading, it becomes the business of the judge to extract it from the proofs and allegations before him, to sever correctly the law from the fact of the case, and again, the facts admitted, from those in controversy, and to present the latter in a distinct shape to the jury for their consideration; an analysis which the rapidity and tumult of a trial at Nisi Prius renders extremely difficult, and which is often defectively conducted.
Of the state of things here explained, it is the natural effect that when the general issue is pleaded, the trial fails, in numerous instances, to accomplish the purposes of justice, or even to terminate the legal dispute, and is followed by the application of the defeated party to the full court in banc, for a new trial. This proceeding involves the necessity of recapitulating, for the information of that court, the whole of what passed vivâ voce at Nisi Prius, of which there is no admissible report, except that of the presiding judge, upon whose alleged error in point of law the application most commonly is founded. The motion for a new trial is, for this reason, beset with peculiar difficulties; the effect of which is, that it ultimately fails in many cases (as there is reason to apprehend) where in justice it ought to succeed, and succeeds in many cases where there is in reality no sufficient ground for the application. It may be added that, even when successful, it gives no redress, beyond that of awarding a new and expensive inquiry upon the matter of fact; and that with respect to the matters of law, of which it may involve the discussion, they are less distinctly and less satisfactorily decided, upon the motion for a new trial, than when raised by special pleading, and so brought before the court in the first instance, by way of demurrer, for determination.
But these considerations give an inadequate idea of the extent of the inconvenience now produced by the great and growing frequency of the Edition: current; Page: [44] motions in question. Indeed we know of no existing abuse of which the influence is so wide, and the pressure so intolerable. They have in a considerable degree impaired the value of a verdict, which, according to the ancient and true principle of law, was of a final and conclusive character, but is now in so many instances subjected to the revision of the court in banc, and with so much facility set aside, that the party in whose favour the opinion of the jury is declared has comparatively little reason to rely on the permanency of the advantage he has obtained. He too often finds that it is but one successful struggle in an arduous and expensive contest, which is to end at last in defeat. But an effect still more serious is the enormous extent to which this branch of practice has encroached upon those portions of the public time properly destined to other employment. As an illustration of this, we may refer to returns received from the King’s Bench and Common Pleas, by which it appears that in Michaelmas Term 1829, ninety-nine motions for new trials were made in the former court, and forty-nine in the latter; that in the King’s Bench rules nisi were granted upon fifty-three of these applications, and not more than four rules for new trials ultimately disposed of in the course of the term; and that in the Common Pleas there were thirty-nine rules nisi granted, of which ten only were disposed of. To such accumulations addition of course is made in each succeeding term; and were it not for the assistance obtained from the sitting of the three judges out of term (a jurisdiction which, in other respects, has appeared to us objectionable, and to require abolition), the result, as far as regards the Court of King’s Bench, would be a total obstruction of the current of ordinary business, by the growing masses of arrears upon motions for new trials. The tendency of the general issue to give occasion for such applications, we have already attempted to explain; and we have no hesitation, therefore, in attributing to the use of that plea the far greater part of the evils to which we have thought it our duty to advert, as connected with motions of that description. We think, too, that its disuse would supply the only practicable and effective remedy.
Other inconveniences, though certainly of less moment, result from that method of pleading. It often happens that points of law, arising at the trial, receive no decision from the judge, but are reserved by him for the opinion of the Court in banc; or with a view to a more distinct and solemn argument before that Court, the facts proved are thrown, by consent of parties, into the form of a special case. Neither of these methods is comparable, in point of certainty, of dispatch, or of cheapness, with that which is afforded by demurrer; and their substitution for the latter operates, like the motion for a new trial, though in a less degree, to the prejudice of both the parties, and to the delay of public business.’*

There is an important communication from Sir William Draper Best, L.C.J., in the Appendix to the same Report, where he proposes vivâ voce examination of the parties as a Edition: current; Page: [45] remedy against the defects of written pleadings. If he had recommended this examination to take place before the judge, it would have corresponded in a great degree with our idea of what pleading ought to be.

‘Assignees of bankrupts are now permitted to summon any persons against whom they bring actions before the commissioners of bankrupts, and examine them as often as they please. Assignees have often extracted, by such examinations, sufficient evidence to support their actions. If it is fit that assignees of bankrupts should be allowed to examine those whom they sue, it is equally fit that other plaintiffs should have the same privilege. And if plaintiffs are permitted to examine defendants, the latter should be allowed to examine plaintiffs. An account on the oath of any party to a cause may be obtained by a bill of discovery. This proves that it is not contrary to equity to examine parties against themselves. The bill of discovery is expensive, dilatory, and often useless. I have heard it said that an equity draftsman must be a great bungler if he cannot save his client from perjury, and yet contrive that his answer shall be of no use to the party who calls for it. To get at truth, the examinant must be required to answer promptly: he must answer for himself, and not have the assistance of another person to find words for him. The examinant’ (qu. examiner?) ‘must have the opportunity of putting such further questions as the answers of the examinant suggest. Neither an answer in chancery, nor an examination on interrogatories, will answer all these purposes. I propose, that as soon as any action be brought (even before appearance) either party to a cause may examine on oath the other, before a barrister of five years’ standing; or if the parties live more than ten miles from any such barrister, before any attorney who has practised five years, that shall be appointed by the Chief Justice of the court in which the cause is depending. The words used by the examinant should be taken down by the person before whom such witness is examined; and the examination so taken be returned to the Court. No questions should be put to any party, which cannot be put to a witness in court, or which a defendant in equity cannot be compelled to answer. The person before whom the examination is taken should be sworn to take the evidence fairly, and to report it correctly. After such examinations, in a great number of cases very few, if any, witnesses will be required. The whole of the case of each party will be fully disclosed, and nothing will remain for juries to do but to assess damages. In cases which depend on circumstances of which the parties have no positive knowledge, and which are to be proved by witnesses, the parties will, from these examinations, discover the nature of these circumstances, and each side will come prepared to make the best of their respective cases. There will remain no pretence for complaining of surprise. Some persons think that parties should not know each other’s cases. Parties know each other’s cases in the trial of issues from Chancery; and when causes are tried a second time, these cases are more easily and satisfactorily tried than any other. Much more mischief is to be apprehended from surprise than from the Edition: current; Page: [46] fullest knowledge of a cause. When each party is equally prepared, no tampering with witnesses—no trick will defeat truth. There will be no occasion to prove instruments, the execution of which is admitted by the party against whom they are to be used, unless he accompanies his admission by the suggestion of something that tends to impeach the validity of the instrument offered in evidence. Attesting witnesses are now brought from the most distant parts of the kingdom to prove instruments, the due execution of which there is not the least pretence for disputing.
There are parties who, ignorant of the answer their opponents have to give, think they have good cases. There are some who know that if the whole truth can be got at, they have no chance of success, but persevere in litigation, in the hope that their adversaries will not discover their weakness, or will not be able to take advantage of it for want of proof; others are misled by their attornies, who afterwards excuse themselves from advising their clients to proceed by protesting that their clients deceived them. These are the ways in which parties deceive themselves, or are deceived to their own ruin, and sometimes the ruin of their unfortunate opponents. The examination of the parties will dispel these delusions; the clients will know the insufficiency of their cases, and that their adversaries are prepared to take advantage of it. Attornies will not be able to screen their characters from the reproach of having given bad advice, by the pretence of not knowing the defects of the cases they have undertaken. I am persuaded that these examinations will stop many cases, and prevent much misery.’*

It is astonishing that, in all these observations of professional men, both on the defects in the English mode of ascertaining the point in dispute, and on the remedies, to not one does it seem to have occurred, that this is a business for the judge,—that it is one great portion of the judicial inquiry,—that unless this part of the inquiry is well performed, nothing else can be well performed,—that there is no chance of its being habitually well performed, if it is not performed by the judge,—and that collateral advantages of the greatest importance result from its being made an essential part of the duty of the judge.
This is a remarkable fact, in evidence of the effect which practice produces on the minds of practising men. They look at what is. That is their habit; and to such a degree of strength is it brought, that they almost lose the power of adverting to anything else. English lawyers have never seen that this has been any part of the business of the judge; it is passed over by them, consequently, as a thing which does not require his interference, and which is fitly performed without him. To us it appears to be so completely the guiding principle of a good procedure, and so necessarily to bring along Edition: current; Page: [47] with it every thing else which is good, that we shall treat very summarily the other parts of procedure.
All the curious learning, and all the vexatious practice connected with the subjects of writs and actions, is discarded at once, if this rational mode of pleading is adopted. A notice to the defendant when his presence is wanted, is all that is necessary to bring the whole case into court. And the dealings of the judge with the parties does all the rest, till the second part of the judicial inquiry commences,—that is, the trial, or the determining, by evidence, the point of fact or of law, on which the question of right is found by the judge to depend.
Of course, the object of a good procedure is, that justice may be attained with the greatest certainty, and at the least expense. One of the great causes of expense is the attendance of witnesses. Every thing, then, should be done to prevent the attendance of unnecessary witnesses. This important object may be attained completely, if the grand instrument of vivâ voce pleading is used.
No witnesses should be allowed to be summoned but under the fiat of the judge. Of course, he will allow none to be summoned but those who can speak to the issue—to the point which determines the question. He acquires that requisite knowledge by interrogation of the parties. The party on whom the burthen of proof devolves, is desired to state what witnesses he wants to be summoned. He is then made to explain with respect to each of them, to what it is that he expects his evidence to go; and only if it appears that such evidence will be useful, does the judge allow the presence of the witness to be required. The defendant, in like manner, is made to show what it is which he expects each of his witnesses to do in meeting such proof; and, upon such showing, the judge in like manner determines which of them shall be required to attend.
On the mode of taking the evidence we think it unnecessary to enlarge. The subject, as regards evidence from all its sources, has been treated with the greatest fullness and efficiency by Mr. Bentham, and we could only repeat what he has explained. There are, however, two of the points on which he has enlarged, to which, on account of their vast importance, we think it necessary to call the attention of our readers.
Except in cases of necessity, all evidence should be delivered vivâ voce in open court, and fully subject to cross-examination. This is the most efficient of all securities for truth in testimony; and yet it is deplorable to learn to what an extent English law, which admits the principle, allows it to be departed from in Edition: current; Page: [48] practice; and the most important points to be decided on evidence unnecessarily deprived of this important security, and therefore of far inferior value.
One of the plainest precepts of common sense is, that evidence to the point in question should be sought from every source from which it is likely to be obtained. All systems of law have run into the most incredible absurdities on this subject, and not less than any of them the English law: its rules about the exclusion of evidence are such, that they would seem to have been drawn up by men whose object it was that the truth should not be disclosed. Reason immediately concurs in the conclusion, that no evidence should be disallowed which bears upon the point, and of which the attainment is not so difficult as to countervail the use. We refer to Mr. Bentham for the triumphant establishment of this great practical maxim. His remarks on the wretched pretences on which the rules of exclusion have been defended, deserve to be pointed out as one of the happiest specimens of the refutation and exposure of interested nonsense.
When the point of fact or of law on which the question of right depends has been determined, nothing remains but to pronounce the decree and give it execution. The means of giving effect to the award of the judge are so simple and obvious, that they cannot escape the notice of any man whose real desire it is that the best means of attaining the object should be employed. It is not therefore our intention to lengthen this article by the needless labour of pointing them out.
Such is the compass of law reform. It is all contained in three essential particulars:—expressing the law as it ought to be expressed; employing judges to do the judicial business of the country where they can do it to most advantage; prescribing to them the mode of inquiry which leads with most certainty, and least trouble, delay, and expense, to the knowledge of the truth.
That they are simple means, that they are efficient means, and that all other means are bad in comparison, is among the clearest and most infallible of the deductions of common sense.
It is very evident, however, that they must be conjoined, in order to the attainment of the end to which they are directed. No one, and no two of them, without the other, will answer our expectation.
Suppose we have the law expressed, as it ought to be expressed; but judges employed and distributed in the barbarous and irrational manner in which the men doing judges’ work in Edition: current; Page: [49] England are distributed and controlled, and doing it with the detestable procedure which they use; it cannot be doubted that the improved expression of a law administered by such instruments would go a very little way towards affording us the unspeakable benefits of good judicature. The delay, the expense, and even the uncertainty, would be very little diminished.
Again, suppose we had judges well supplied and placed, both for the original and appellate jurisdiction, but acting through an abominable procedure, and with a law abominably expressed, it is obvious under what disadvantages these judges would necessarily act, and to what an extent they would be hindered from affording to the community the benefit of a good administration of justice.
As these three things, had in perfection, are indispensable for a good administration of justice, it is obvious what must be the effect of trying to do without them, by making repairs on the despicable instruments which exist. Repair them as long as you please, you will have nothing but a pair of Sir John Cutler’s stockings after all. Touch this thing or the other thing in your ill-contrived judicial establishment, it is an ill-contrived judicial establishment still. Rectify some of the vices of your system of written pleadings, it is a system of written pleadings still, and thoroughly ill-adapted to the end we desire to attain. In regard to codification, doing this piecemeal is something like a caricature of reason. If a mass of ideas, all in disorder, are to be methodized so that they may be expressed with the greatest brevity and accuracy, you must take them all together; you cannot detach a portion, and say, we will order these; because the order proper for them depends upon the order which is proper for all the rest.
We do not, however, though we think this a most important principle, undervalue the efforts of those who have pushed the work of codification in a less perfect manner. They saw that in the benighted state of mind of those on whom the decision still depended, the proposition to systematize and accurately express the whole law would be regarded as something frantic, while that of working upon a part would at any rate obtain a hearing. That hearing was, at all events, a good thing. It tended to familiarize to all men’s minds the subject. It tended to make them acquainted with the reasons for and the reasons against codification; the clearness and cogency of the one, the miserable imbecility of the other. This process happily is going on; and we expect shortly to hear a call for general and comprehensive codification, as irresistible as that which has given us, at last, a commencement of parliamentary reform.
Edition: current; Page: [50]
We shall, probably, be asked, how we would introduce this tripartite reform, no part of which will act well in the absence of any other?—and this we are very willing to declare. We would make all the requisite preparations. We would have the law codified to the reasonable satisfaction of those who are competent judges of such a work. We would have the judicial districts of the several judges of original jurisdiction properly marked out; and the judges, both original and appellate, carefully selected and appointed. We would also have the proper rules for settling the issue by the judge, under the interrogation of parties, and for conducting the proof of the issue, settled with the utmost care, and prescribed. We would then introduce the reform entire and at once, and without any apprehension of inconvenience for a moment. Every judge would be at his post, with an intelligible book of the law for his guidance; and with only the ordinary portion of good sense, to develope the allegations presented to him, and an honest desire to do his duty, he would not often go wrong; because his path would be darkened neither by a mysterious law, nor a mysterious procedure. The people would find the redress of their wrongs offered to each of them at his door, without delay and without expense; and every man would congratulate both himself and his neighbours upon so great and happy a change in their situation.
It is often asked, as an objection to this reform of the judicial establishment where would you find a sufficient number of qualified men to act as judges? But this is a question very easily answered. The apprehension of difficulty arises from a confusion of ideas. The idea of the old technical system springs up; and, along with it, the idea of the men who, by a life of labour, have mastered the difficulties of some part of it. A great number of such men there would be some difficulty in finding. But there is no need of them. Our book of law is a plain book: and our system of procedure is a plain course, the dictate of common sense in every step of it. A very short apprenticeship would qualify any well-educated man of ordinary understanding to be a good judge in such circumstances.
The chief demand for high qualifications would be in the judges of appeal; but they would not be so numerous as to make it difficult to find men of the highest qualifications for their important and elevated situation.
The only part of the preparation, which would require time, would be the codification of the law; that is (be it always carefully remembered) putting it into good order and good expression. Here the quantity of the labour is great; and it cannot Edition: current; Page: [51] be divided. The law cannot be separated into parcels, one part given to one man, another to another, to codify. The marshalling a mass of ideas in disorder is essentially the work of one mind. One mind must survey the whole, to be qualified to say where every part of a confused mass should be located, in order to make it part of an organized and systematic whole.
It is very evident, however, that in order to afford the best chance for having the work well performed, more minds than one should be applied to it. This might be done by the offer of premiums. To any man who produces a code, adequate reward should be insured. A very high reward should be held out to him whose production, on the comparative trial, is the one approved. But to induce men to devote a number of their years to hard labour, something more than the mere chance of a reward must be afforded. The men who are most likely to be efficient workmen will be found to be without independent incomes; and they must be supported while the work is going on. Some arrangements would be necessary (the reward being high) to limit the number of applicants admitted, and to guard against fraud; but these smaller matters present no painsworthy difficulty, and will be thought of time enough, when the public voice is prepared to call imperatively for this essential instrument of a people’s good. Whether this call will come at a less or at a greater distance of time, it is impossible to foresee. The work will certainly be performed, whenever we have a House of Commons which truly represents the people; that is, a House of Commons chosen by the people, not nominally, as, to a great degree, it is at present, but actually, and in truth; when, and not before, we shall have a House of Commons whose thoughts will be devoted to the public weal.
P. Q.
